1 
 
Riggs v. Palmer 
 
Court of Appeals of New York 
115 N.Y. 506, 22 N.E. 188 (1889) 
 
■ Earl, J. 
 
On the 13th day of August, 1880, Francis B. Palmer made his last will and testament, in which 
he gave small legacies to his two daughters, Mrs. Riggs and Mrs. Preston, the plaintiffs in this 
action, and the remainder of his estate to his grandson, the defendant Elmer E. Palmer. . . . At the 
date of the will, and subsequently to the death of the testator, Elmer lived with him as a member 
of his family, and at his death was 16 years old. He knew of the provisions made in his favor in 
the will, and, that he might prevent his grandfather from revoking such provisions, . . . he 
willfully murdered him by poisoning him. He now claims the property, and the sole question for 
our determination is, can he have it? 
 
The defendants say that the testator is dead; that his will was made in due form . . . ; and that 
therefore it must have effect according to the letter of the law. It is quite true that statutes 
regulating the making, proof, and effect of wills and the devolution of property, if literally 
construed, and if their force and effect can in no way and under no circumstances be controlled 
or modified, give this property to the murderer. The purpose of those statutes was to enable 
testators to dispose of their estates to the objects of their bounty at death, and to carry into effect 
their final wishes legally expressed; and in considering and giving effect to them this purpose 
must be kept in view. It was the intention of the law-makers that the donees in a will should have 
the property given to them. But it never could have been their intention that a donee who 
murdered the testator to make the will operative should have any benefit under it. If such a case 
had been present to their minds, and it had been supposed necessary to make some provision of 
law to meet it, it cannot be doubted that they would have provided for it.  
 
It is a familiar canon of construction that a thing which is within the intention of the makers of a 
statute is as much within the statute as if it were within the letter; and a thing which is within the 
letter of the statute is not within the statute unless it be within the intention of the makers. The 
writers of laws do not always express their intention perfectly, but either exceed it or fall short of 
it, so that judges are to collect it from probable or rational conjectures only, and this is called 
“rational interpretation;” and Rutherford, in his Institutes . . . says: “Where we make use of 
rational interpretation, sometimes we restrain the meaning of the writer so as to take in less, and 
sometimes we extend or enlarge his meaning so as to take in more, than his words express.” . . . 
[A]nd it is said in Bacon: “By an equitable construction a case not within the letter of a statute is 
sometimes holden to be within the meaning, because it is within the mischief for which a remedy 
is provided. The reason for such construction is that the law-makers could not set down every 
case in express terms. In order to form a right judgment whether a case be within the equity of a 
statute, it is a good way to suppose the law-maker present, and that you have asked him this 
question: Did you intend to comprehend this case? Then you must give yourself such answer as 
you imagine he, being an upright and reasonable man, would have given. If this be that he did 
mean to comprehend it, you may safely hold the case to be within the equity of the statute; for 
while you do no more than he would have done, you do not act contrary to the statute, but in 

2 
 
conformity thereto.” In some cases the letter of a legislative act is restrained by an equitable 
construction; in others, it is enlarged; in others, the construction is contrary to the letter. . . . If the 
law-makers could, as to this case, be consulted, would they say that they intended by their 
general language that the property of a testator or of an ancestor should pass to one who had 
taken his life for the express purpose of getting his property? In [Blackstone’s Commentaries], 
the learned author, speaking of the construction of statutes, says: “If there arise out of them 
collaterally any absurd consequences manifestly contradictory to common reason, they are with 
regard to those collateral consequences void. . . . Where some collateral matter arises out of the 
general words, and happens to be unreasonable, there the judges are in decency to conclude that 
this consequence was not foreseen by the parliament, and therefore they are at liberty to expound 
the statute by equity, and only quoad hoc disregard it;” and he gives as an illustration, if an act of 
parliament gives a man power to try all causes that arise within his manor of Dale, yet, if a cause 
should arise in which he himself is party, the act is construed not to extend to that, because it is 
unreasonable that any man should determine his own quarrel. There was a statute in Bologna that 
whoever drew blood in the streets should be severely punished, and yet it was held not to apply 
to the case of a barber who opened a vein in the street. It is commanded in the decalogue that no 
work shall be done upon the Sabbath, and yet giving the command a rational interpretation 
founded upon its design the Infallible Judge held that it did not prohibit works of necessity, 
charity, or benevolence on that day. 
 
What could be more unreasonable than to suppose that it was the legislative intention in the 
general laws passed for the orderly, peaceable, and just devolution of property that they should 
have operation in favor of one who murdered his ancestor that he might speedily come into the 
possession of his estate? Such an intention is inconceivable. We need not, therefore, be much 
troubled by the general language contained in the laws. Besides, all laws . . . may be controlled 
in their operation and effect by general, fundamental maxims of the common law. No one shall 
be permitted to profit by his own fraud, or to take advantage of his own wrong, or to found any 
claim upon his own iniquity, or to acquire property by his own crime. These maxims are dictated 
by public policy, have their foundation in universal law administered in all civilized countries, 
and have nowhere been superseded by statute. . . . 
 
Here there was no certainty that this murderer would survive the testator, or that the testator 
would not change his will, and there was no certainty that he would get this property if nature 
was allowed to take its course. He therefore murdered the testator expressly to vest himself with 
an estate. Under such circumstances, what law, human or divine, will allow him to take the estate 
and enjoy the fruits of his crime? . . . My view of this case does not inflict upon Elmer any 
greater or other punishment for his crime than the law specifies. It takes from him no property, 
but simply holds that he shall not acquire property by his crime, and thus be rewarded for its 
commission. . . . 
 
■ Gray, J. (dissenting.) 
 
This appeal presents an extraordinary state of facts, and the case, in respect of them, I believe, is 
without precedent in this state. The respondent, a lad of 16 years of age, being aware of the 
provisions in his grandfather’s will, which constituted him the residuary legatee of the testator’s 
estate, caused his death by poison, in 1882. For this crime he was tried, and was convicted of 

3 
 
murder in the second degree, and at the time of the commencement of this action he was serving 
out his sentence in the state reformatory. This action was brought by two of the children of the 
testator for the purpose of having those provisions of the will in the respondent’s favor canceled 
and annulled. The appellants’ argument for a reversal of the judgment, which dismissed their 
complaint, is that the respondent unlawfully prevented a revocation of the existing will, or a new 
will from being made, by his crime; and that he terminated the enjoyment by the testator of his 
property, and effected his own succession to it, by the same crime. They say that to permit the 
respondent to take the property willed to him would be to permit him to take advantage of his 
own wrong. To sustain their position the appellants’ counsel has submitted an able and elaborate 
brief, and, if I believed that the decision of the question could be effected by considerations of an 
equitable nature, I should not hesitate to assent to views which commend themselves to the 
conscience. But the matter does not lie within the domain of conscience. We are bound by the 
rigid rules of law, which have been established by the legislature, and within the limits of which 
the determination of this question is confined. The question we are dealing with is whether a 
testamentary disposition can be altered, or a will revoked, after the testator’s death, through an 
appeal to the courts, when the legislature has by its enactments prescribed exactly when and how 
wills may be made, altered, and revoked, and apparently, as it seems to me, when they have been 
fully complied with, has left no room for the exercise of an equitable jurisdiction by courts over 
such matters. Modern jurisprudence, in recognizing the right of the individual, under more or 
less restrictions, to dispose of his property after his death, subjects it to legislative control, both 
as to extent and as to mode of exercise. . . . To the statutory restraints which are imposed upon 
the disposition of one’s property by will are added strict and systematic statutory rules for the 
execution, alteration, and revocation of the will, which must be, at least substantially, if not 
exactly, followed to insure validity and performance. The reason for the establishment of such 
rules, we may naturally assume, consists in the purpose to create those safeguards about these 
grave and important acts which experience has demonstrated to be the wisest and surest. That 
freedom which is permitted to be exercised in the testamentary disposition of one’s estate by the 
laws of the state is subject to its being exercised in conformity with the regulations of the 
statutes. The capacity and the power of the individual to dispose of his property after death, and 
the mode by which that power can be exercised, are matters of which the legislature was 
assumed the entire control, and has undertaken to regulate with comprehensive particularity. 
 
The appellants’ argument is not helped by reference to those rules of the civil law, or to those 
laws of other governments, by which the heir, or legatee, is excluded from benefit under the 
testament if he has been convicted of killing, or attempting to kill, the testator. In the absence of 
such legislation here, the courts are not empowered to institute such a system of remedial justice. 
The deprivation of the heir of his testamentary succession by the Roman law, when guilty of 
such a crime, plainly was intended to be in the nature of a punishment imposed upon him. The 
succession, in such a case of guilt, escheated to the exchequer. See Dom. Civil Law, pt. 2, bk. 1, 
tit. 1, § 3. I concede that rules of law which annul testamentary provisions made for the benefit 
of those who have become unworthy of them may be based on principles of equity and of natural 
justice. It is quite reasonable to suppose that a testator would revoke or alter his will, where his 
mind has been so angered and changed as to make him unwilling to have his will executed as it 
stood. But these principles only suggest sufficient reasons for the enactment of laws to meet such 
cases. 
 

4 
 
The statutes of this state have prescribed various ways in which a will may be altered or revoked; 
but the very provision defining the modes of alteration and revocation implies a prohibition of 
alteration or revocation in any other way. The words of the section of the statute are: “No will in 
writing, except in the cases hereinafter mentioned, nor any part thereof, shall be revoked or 
altered otherwise,” etc. Where, therefore, none of the cases mentioned are met by the facts, and 
the revocation is not in the way described in the section, the will of the testator is unalterable. I 
think that a valid will must continue as a will always, unless revoked in the manner provided by 
the statutes. Mere intention to revoke a will does not have the effect of revocation. The intention 
to revoke is necessary to constitute the effective revocation of a will, but it must be demonstrated 
by one of the acts contemplated by the statute. . . . The finding of fact of the referee that 
presumably the testator would have altered his will had he known of his grantor’s murderous 
intent cannot affect the question. We may concede it to the fullest extent; but still the cardinal 
objection is undisposed of,—that the making and the revocation of a will are purely matters of 
statutory regulation, by which the court is bound in the determination of questions relating to 
these acts. 
 
. . . I cannot find any support for the argument that the respondent’s succession to the property 
should be avoided because of his criminal act, when the laws are silent. Public policy does not 
demand it; for the demands of public policy are satisfied by the proper execution of the laws and 
the punishment of the crime. There has been no convention between the testator and his legatee 
nor is there any such contractual element, in such a disposition of property by a testator, as to 
impose or imply conditions in the legatee. The appellants’ argument practically amounts to this: 
that, as the legatee has been guilty of a crime, by the commission of which he is placed in a 
position to sooner receive the benefits of the testamentary provision, his rights to the property 
should be forfeited, and he should be divested of his estate. To allow their argument to prevail, 
would involve the diversion by the court of the testator’s estate into the hands of persons whom, 
possibly enough, for all we know, the testator might not have chosen or desired as its recipients. 
Practically the court is asked to make another will for the testator. The laws do not warrant this 
judicial action, and mere presumption would not be strong enough to sustain it. But, more than 
this, to concede the appellants’ views would involve the imposition of an additional punishment 
or penalty upon the respondent. What power or warrant have the courts to add to the 
respondent’s penalties by depriving him of property? The law has punished him for his crime, 
and we may not say that it was an insufficient punishment. In the trial and punishment of the 
respondent the law has vindicated itself for the outrage which he committed, and further judicial 
utterance upon the subject of punishment or deprivation of rights is barred . . . 
 