Garland v. Cargill (2024)
Supreme Court of the United States.
Justice THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
Congress has long restricted access to “ ‘machinegun[s],’ ” a category of firearms defined by the ability
to “shoot, automatically more than one shot ... by a single function of the trigger.” 26 U.S.C. § 5845(b);
see also 18 U.S.C. § 922(o). Semiautomatic firearms, which require shooters to reengage the trigger for
every shot, are not machineguns. This case asks whether a bump stock—an accessory for a
semiautomatic rifle that allows the shooter to rapidly reengage the trigger (and therefore achieve a high
rate of fire)—converts the rifle into a “machinegun.” We hold that it does not and therefore affirm.
I
A
Under the National Firearms Act of 1934, a “machinegun” is “any weapon which shoots, is designed to
shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by
a single function of the trigger.” § 5845(b). The statutory definition also includes “any part designed and
intended ... for use in converting a weapon into a machinegun.” Ibid. With a machinegun, a shooter can fire
multiple times, or even continuously, by engaging the trigger only once. This capability distinguishes a
machinegun from a semiautomatic firearm. With a semiautomatic firearm, the shooter can fire only one time
by engaging the trigger. The shooter must release and reengage the trigger to fire another shot. Machineguns
can ordinarily achieve higher rates of fire than semiautomatic firearms because the shooter does not need
to release and reengage the trigger between shots. 
Shooters have devised techniques for firing semiautomatic firearms at rates approaching those of some
machineguns. One technique is called bump firing. A shooter who bump fires a rifle uses the firearm's recoil
to help rapidly manipulate the trigger. The shooter allows the recoil from one shot to push the whole firearm
backward. As the rifle slides back and away from the shooter's stationary trigger finger, the trigger is
released and reset for the next shot. Simultaneously, the shooter uses his nontrigger hand to maintain
forward pressure on the rifle's front grip. The forward pressure counteracts the recoil and causes the firearm
(and thus the trigger) to move forward and “bump” into the shooter's trigger finger. This bump reengages
the trigger and causes another shot to fire, and so on. 
Bump firing is a balancing act. The shooter must maintain enough forward pressure to ensure that he will
bump the trigger with sufficient force to engage it. But, if the shooter applies too much forward pressure,
the rifle will not slide back far enough to allow the trigger to reset. The right balance produces a
reciprocating motion that permits the shooter to repeatedly engage and release the trigger in rapid
succession. 
Although bump firing does not require any additional equipment, there are accessories designed to make
the technique easier. A “bump stock” is one such accessory. It replaces a semiautomatic rifle's stock (the
back part of the rifle that rests against the shooter's shoulder) with a plastic casing that allows every other
part of the rifle to slide back and forth. This casing helps manage the back-and-forth motion required for
bump firing. A bump stock also has a ledge to keep the shooter's trigger finger stationary. A bump stock
does not alter the basic mechanics of bump firing. As with any semiautomatic firearm, the trigger still must
be released and reengaged to fire each additional shot.
B
1

The question in this case is whether a bump stock transforms a semiautomatic rifle into a “machinegun,”
as defined by § 5845(b). For many years, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)
took the position that semiautomatic rifles equipped with bump stocks were not machineguns under the
statute. On more than 10 separate occasions over several administrations, ATF consistently concluded that
rifles equipped with bump stocks cannot “automatically” fire more than one shot “by a single function of
the trigger.” In April 2017, for example, ATF explained that a rifle equipped with a bump stock does not
“operat[e] automatically” because “forward pressure must be applied with the support hand to the forward
handguard.” Id., at 66. And, because the shooter slides the rifle forward in the stock “to fire each shot, each
succeeding shot fir[es] with a single trigger function.”
ATF abruptly reversed course in response to a mass shooting in Las Vegas, Nevada. In October 2017, a
gunman fired on a crowd attending an outdoor music festival in Las Vegas, killing 58 people and wounding
over 500 more. The gunman equipped his weapons with bump stocks, which allowed him to fire hundreds
of rounds in a matter of minutes. 
This tragedy created tremendous political pressure to outlaw bump stocks nationwide. Within days,
Members of Congress proposed bills to ban bump stocks and other devices “designed ... to accelerate the
rate of fire of a semiautomatic rifle.” None of these bills became law. Similar proposals in the intervening
years have also stalled.
While the first wave of bills was pending, ATF began considering whether to reinterpret § 5845(b) ’s
definition of “machinegun” to include bump stocks. It proposed a rule that would amend its regulations to
“clarify” that bump stocks are machineguns. 83 Fed. Reg. 13442 (2018). ATF's about-face drew criticism
from some observers, including those who agreed that bump stocks should be banned. Senator Dianne
Feinstein, for example, warned that ATF lacked statutory authority to prohibit bump stocks, explaining that
the proposed regulation “ ‘hinge[d] on a dubious analysis’ ” and that the “ ‘gun lobby and manufacturers
[would] have a field day with [ATF's] reasoning’ ” in court. Statement on Regulation To Ban Bump Stocks
(Mar. 23, 2018). She asserted that “ ‘legislation is the only way to ban bump stocks.’ ” Ibid. 
ATF issued its final Rule in 2018. 83 Fed. Reg. 66514. The agency's earlier regulations simply restated §
5845(b)’s statutory definition. Ibid. The final Rule amended those regulations by adding the following
language:
“[T]he term ‘automatically’ as it modifies ‘shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily restored
to shoot,’ means functioning as the result of a self-acting or self-regulating mechanism that allows
the firing of multiple rounds through a single function of the trigger; and ‘single function of the
trigger’ means a single pull of the trigger and analogous motions. The term ‘machinegun’ includes
a bump-stock-type device, i.e., a device that allows a semi-automatic firearm to shoot more than
one shot with a single pull of the trigger by harnessing the *414 recoil energy of the semi-automatic
firearm to which it is affixed so that the trigger resets and continues firing without additional
physical manipulation of the trigger by the shooter.”
The final Rule also repudiated ATF's previous guidance that bump stocks did not qualify as “machineguns”
under § 5845(b). Id., at 66530–66531. And, it ordered owners of bump stocks to destroy them or surrender
them to ATF within 90 days. Id., at 66530. Bump-stock owners who failed to comply would be subject to
criminal prosecution. Id., at 66525; see also 18 U.S.C. § 922(o)(1).
C
Michael Cargill surrendered two bump stocks to ATF under protest. He then filed suit to challenge the final
2

Rule, asserting a claim under the Administrative Procedure Act. As relevant, Cargill alleged that ATF
lacked statutory authority to promulgate the final Rule because bump stocks are not “machinegun[s]” as
defined in § 5845(b). After a bench trial, the District Court entered judgment for ATF. The court concluded
that “a bump stock fits the statutory definition of a ‘machinegun.’ ” Cargill v. Barr, 502 F.Supp.3d 1163,
1194 (WD Tex. 2020). 
The Court of Appeals initially affirmed, 20 F.4th 1004 (CA5 2021), but later reversed after rehearing en
banc, 57 F.4th 447 (CA5 2023) . A majority agreed, at a minimum, that § 5845(b)  is ambiguous as to
whether a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock fits the statutory definition of a machinegun.
And, the majority concluded that the rule of lenity required resolving that ambiguity in Cargill's favor. Id.,
at 469 ; see also id., at 450, n.  An eight-judge plurality determined that the statutory definition of
“machinegun” unambiguously excludes such weapons. A semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock,
the plurality reasoned, fires only one shot “each time the trigger ‘acts,’ ” id., at 459, and so does not fire
“more than one shot ... by a single function *415 of the trigger,” § 5845(b). The plurality also concluded
that a bump stock does not enable a semiautomatic rifle to fire more than one shot “automatically” because
the shooter must “maintain manual, forward pressure on the barrel.” Id., at 463. 
We granted certiorari, 601 U. S. ––––, 144 S.Ct. 374, 217 L.Ed.2d 202 (2023), to address a split among the
Courts of Appeals regarding whether bump stocks meet § 5845(b)’s definition of “machinegun.”2 We now
affirm. 
II
Section 5845(b) defines a “machinegun” as any weapon capable of firing “automatically more than one shot
... by a single function of the trigger.” We hold that a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock is not
a “machinegun” because it cannot fire more than one shot “by a single function of the trigger.” And, even
if it could, it would not do so “automatically.” ATF therefore exceeded its statutory authority by issuing a
Rule that classifies bump stocks as machineguns. 
A
A semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock does not fire more than one shot “by a single function
of the trigger.” With or without a bump stock, a shooter must release and reset the trigger between every
shot. And, any subsequent shot fired after the trigger has been released and reset is the result of a separate
and distinct “function of the trigger.” All that a bump stock does is accelerate the rate of fire by causing
these distinct “function[s]” of the trigger to occur in rapid succession. 
As always, we start with the statutory text, which refers to “a single function of the trigger.” The “function”
of an *416 object is “the mode of action by which it fulfils its purpose.” 4 Oxford English Dictionary 602
(1933); see also American Heritage Dictionary 533 (1969) (“The natural or proper action for which a ...
mechanism ... is fitted or employed”). And, a “trigger” is an apparatus, such as a “movable catch or lever,”
that “sets some force or mechanism in action.” 11 Oxford English Dictionary, at 357; see also American
Heritage Dictionary, at 1371 (“The lever pressed by the finger to discharge a firearm” or “[a]ny similar
device used to release or activate a mechanism”); Webster's New International Dictionary 2711 (2d ed.
1934) (“A piece, as a lever, connected with a catch or detent as a means of releasing it; specif., Firearms,
the part of a lock moved by the finger to release the cock in firing”). The phrase “function of the trigger”
thus refers to the mode of action by which the trigger activates the firing mechanism. For most firearms,
including the ones at issue here, the trigger is a curved metal lever. On weapons with these standard trigger
mechanisms, the phrase “function of the trigger” means the physical trigger movement required to shoot
the firearm. 
3

No one disputes that a semiautomatic rifle without a bump stock is not a machinegun because it fires only
one shot per “function of the trigger.” That is, engaging the trigger a single time will cause the firing
mechanism to discharge only one shot. To understand why, it is helpful to consider the mechanics of the
firing cycle for a semiautomatic rifle. Because the statutory definition is keyed to a “function of the trigger,”
only the trigger assembly is relevant for our purposes. Although trigger assemblies for semiautomatic rifles
vary, the basic mechanics are generally the same. The following series of illustrations depicts how the
trigger assembly on an AR–15 style semiautomatic rifle works. In each illustration, the front of the rifle (i.e.,
the barrel) would be pointing to the left. 
We begin with an overview of the relevant components: 
**1621
Figure 1.
 
The trigger is a simple lever that moves backward and forward. P. Sweeney, Gunsmithing the AR–15, p.
131 (2016). The square point at the top left edge of the trigger locks into a notch at the bottom of the
hammer. P. Sweeney, Gunsmithing: Rifles 269 (1999). The hammer is a spring-loaded part that swings
forward toward the barrel and strikes the firing pin, causing a shot to fire . The disconnector is the
component responsible for resetting the hammer to its original position after a shot is fired.
We turn next to how these components operate: 
4

*418
Figure 2.
 
When the shooter engages the trigger by moving it backward (as indicated by the arrow), the square point
of the trigger pivots downward and out of the notch securing the hammer. Ibid. This movement releases the
s p r i n g - l o a d e d  h a m m e r ,  a l l o w i n g  i t  t o  s w i n g  f o r w a r d .
.
Figure 3.
 At the top of the hammer's rotation, it strikes the firing pin, causing the weapon to fire a single shot.
5

Figure 4.
 
The firearm then ejects the spent cartridge from the chamber and loads a new one in its place. D. Long, The
Complete AR–15/M16 Sourcebook 206 (2001). The mechanism that performs this task swings the hammer
backward at the same time. Ibid.
Figure 5.
 
As the hammer swings backward, it latches onto the disconnector. Sweeney, Gunsmithing: Rifles, at 269.
This latching(circled above) prevents the hammer from swinging forward again after a new cartridge is
6

loaded into the chamber. Ibid. The disconnector will hold the hammer in that position for as long as the
shooter holds the trigger back, thus preventing the firearm from firing another shot.      
Figure 6.
Finally, when the shooter takes pressure off the trigger and allows it to move forward (as indicated by the
arrow), the hammer slips off the disconnector just as the square point of the trigger rises into the notch on
the hammer (circled above). Ibid. The trigger mechanism is thereby reset to the original position shown in
Figure 1. A semiautomatic rifle must complete this cycle for each shot fired.5ATF does not dispute that this
complete process is what constitutes a “single function of the trigger.” A shooter may fire the weapon again
after the trigger has reset, but only by engaging the trigger a second time and thereby initiating a new firing
cycle. For each shot, the shooter must engage the trigger and then release the trigger to allow it to reset. Any
additional shot fired after one cycle is the result of a separate and distinct “function of the trigger.”
 
Nothing changes when a semiautomatic rifle is equipped with a bump stock. The firing cycle remains the
same. Between every shot, the shooter must release pressure from the trigger and allow it to reset before
reengaging the trigger for another shot. A bump stock merely reduces the amount of time that elapses
between separate “functions” of the trigger. The bump stock makes it easier for the shooter to move the
firearm back toward his shoulder and thereby release pressure from the trigger and reset it. And, it helps
the shooter press the trigger against his finger very quickly thereafter. A bump stock does not convert a
semiautomatic rifle into **1623 a machinegun any more than a shooter with a lightning-fast trigger finger
does. Even with a bump stock, a semiautomatic rifle will fire only one shot for every “function of the
trigger.” So, a bump stock cannot qualify as a machinegun under § 5845(b)’s definition. 
Although ATF agrees on a semiautomatic rifle's mechanics, it nevertheless insists that a bump stock allows
a semiautomatic rifle to fire multiple shots “by a single function of the trigger.” ATF starts by interpreting
the phrase “single function of the trigger” to mean “a single pull of the trigger and analogous motions.” 83
Fed. Reg. 66553. A shooter using a bump stock, it asserts, must pull the trigger only one time to initiate a
bump-firing sequence of multiple shots. Id., at 66554. This initial trigger pull sets off a sequence—fire,
recoil, bump, fire—that allows the weapon to continue firing “without additional physical manipulation of
7

the trigger by the shooter.” Ibid. According to ATF, all the shooter must do is keep his trigger finger
stationary on the bump stock's ledge and maintain constant forward pressure on the front grip to continue
firing. The dissent offers similar reasoning.
This argument rests on the mistaken premise that there is a difference between a shooter flexing his finger
to pull the trigger and a shooter pushing the firearm forward to bump the trigger against his stationary
finger. ATF and the dissent seek to call the shooter's initial trigger pull a “function of the trigger” while
ignoring the subsequent “bumps” of the shooter's finger against the trigger before every additional shot. But,
§ 5845(b) does not define a machinegun based on what type of human input engages the trigger—whether
it be a pull, bump, or something else. Nor does it define a machinegun based on whether the shooter has
assistance engaging the trigger. The statutory definition instead hinges on how many shots discharge when
the shooter engages the trigger. And, as we have explained, a semiautomatic rifle will fire only one shot
each time the shooter engages the trigger—with or without a bump stock.
In any event, ATF's argument cannot succeed on its own terms. The final Rule defines “function of the
trigger” to *423 include not only “a single pull of the trigger” but also any “analogous motions.” 83 Fed.
Reg. 66553. ATF concedes that one such analogous motion that qualifies as a single function of the trigger
is “sliding the rifle forward” to bump the trigger. Brief for Petitioners 22. But, if that is true, then every
bump is a separate “function of the trigger,” and semiautomatic rifles equipped with bump stocks are
therefore not machineguns. ATF resists the natural implication of its reasoning, insisting that the bumping
motion is a “function of the trigger” only when it initiates, but not when it continues, a firing sequence. But,
Congress did not write a statutory definition of “machinegun” keyed to when a firing sequence begins and
ends. Section 5845(b) asks only whether a weapon fires more than one shot “by a single function of the
trigger.”  
Finally, the position that ATF and the dissent endorse is logically inconsistent. They reason that a
semiautomatic rifle **1624 equipped with a bump stock fires more than one shot by a single function of
the trigger because a shooter “need only pull the trigger and maintain forward pressure” to “activate
continuous fire.” Post, at 1632; see also Brief for Petitioners 23. If that is correct, however, then the same
should be true for a semiautomatic rifle without a bump stock. After all, as the dissent and ATF themselves
acknowledge, a shooter manually bump firing a semiautomatic rifle can achieve continuous fire by holding
his trigger finger stationary and maintaining forward pressure with his nontrigger hand. See post, at 1629
- 1630; 83 Fed. Reg. 66533. Yet, they agree that a semiautomatic rifle without a bump stock “fires only one
shot each time the shooter pulls the trigger.” Post, at 1629; see also 83 Fed. Reg. 66534. Their argument
is thus at odds with itself. 
We conclude that a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock is not a “machinegun” because it does
not fire more than one shot “by a single function of the trigger.” 
B
A bump stock is not a “machinegun” for another reason: Even if a semiautomatic rifle with a bump stock
could fire more than one shot “by a single function of the trigger,” it would not do so “automatically.”
Section 5845(b) asks whether a weapon “shoots ... automatically more than one shot ... by a single function
of the trigger.” The statute thus specifies the precise action that must “automatically” cause a weapon to
fire “more than one shot”—a “single function of the trigger.” If something more than a “single function of
the trigger” is required to fire multiple shots, the weapon does not satisfy the statutory definition. As Judge
Henderson put it, the “statutory definition of ‘machinegun’ does not include a firearm that shoots more than
one round ‘automatically’ by a single pull of the trigger AND THEN SOME.”
8

Firing multiple shots using a semiautomatic rifle with a bump stock requires more than a single function
of the trigger. A shooter must also actively maintain just the right amount of forward pressure on the rifle's
front grip with his nontrigger hand. See supra, at 1617 - 1618. Too much forward pressure and the rifle will
not slide back far enough to release and reset the trigger, preventing the rifle from firing another shot. Too
little pressure and the trigger will not bump the shooter's trigger finger with sufficient force to fire another
shot. Without this ongoing manual input, a semiautomatic rifle with a bump stock will not fire multiple
shots. Thus, firing multiple shots requires engaging the trigger one time—and then some. 7 
ATF and the dissent counter that machineguns also require continuous manual input from a shooter: He
must both engage the trigger and keep it pressed down to continue shooting. In their view, there is no
meaningful difference between holding down the trigger of a traditional machinegun and maintaining
forward pressure on the front grip of a semiautomatic rifle with a bump stock. This argument ignores that
Congress defined a machinegun by what happens “automatically” “by a single function of the trigger.”
Simply pressing and holding the trigger down on a fully automatic rifle is not manual input in addition to
a trigger's function—it is what causes the trigger to function in the first place. By contrast, pushing forward
on the front grip of a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock is not part of functioning the trigger.
After all, pushing on the front grip will not cause the weapon to fire unless the shooter also engages the
trigger with his other hand. Thus, while a fully automatic rifle fires multiple rounds “automatically ... by
a single function of the trigger,” a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock can achieve the same
result only by a single function of the trigger and then some. 
Moreover, a semiautomatic rifle with a bump stock is indistinguishable from another weapon that ATF
concedes cannot fire multiple shots “automatically”: the Ithaca Model 37 shotgun. The Model 37 allows
the user to “slam fire”—that is, fire multiple shots by holding down the trigger while operating the shotgun's
pump action. Each pump ejects the spent cartridge and loads a new one into the chamber. If the shooter is
holding down the trigger, the new cartridge will *426  fire as soon as it is loaded. According to ATF, the
Model 37 fires more than one shot by a single function of the trigger, but it does not do so “automatically”
because the shooter must manually operate the pump action with his nontrigger hand. See 83 Fed. Reg.
66534. That logic mandates the same result here. Maintaining the proper amount of forward pressure on
the front grip of a bump-stock equipped rifle is no less additional input than is operating the pump action
on the Model 37. 
ATF responds that a shooter is less physically involved with operating a bump-stock equipped rifle than
operating the Model 37's pump action. Once the shooter pulls the rifle's trigger a single time, the bump stock
“harnesses the firearm's recoil energy in a continuous back-and-forth cycle that allows the shooter to attain
continuous firing.” Id., at 66519. But, even if one aspect of a weapon's operation could be seen as
“automatic,” that would not mean the weapon “shoots ... automatically more than one shot ... by a single
function of the trigger .” § 5845(b)  (emphasis added). After all, many weapons have some “automatic”
features. For example, semiautomatic rifles eject the spent cartridge from the firearm's chamber and load
a new one in its place without any input from the shooter. See supra, at 1621. A semiautomatic rifle is
therefore “automatic” in the general sense that it performs some operations that would otherwise need to
be completed by hand. But, as all agree, a semiautomatic rifle cannot fire more than one shot “automatically
... by a single function of the trigger” because the shooter must do *427 more than simply engage the trigger
one time. The same is **1626 true of a semiautomatic rifle equipped with a bump stock. 
Thus, even if a semiautomatic rifle could fire more than one shot by a single function of the trigger, it would
not do so “automatically.” 
C
9

Abandoning the text, ATF and the dissent attempt to shore up their position by relying on the presumption
against ineffectiveness. That presumption weighs against interpretations of a statute that would “rende[r]
the law in a great measure nugatory, and enable offenders to elude its provisions in the most easy manner.”
The Emily, 9 Wheat. 381, 389, 22 U.S. 381, 6 L.Ed. 116 (1824). It is a modest corollary to the commonsense
proposition “that Congress presumably does not enact useless laws.” United States v. Castleman, 572 U.S.
157, 178, 134 S.Ct. 1405, 188 L.Ed.2d 426 (2014)  (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment). 
In ATF's view, Congress “restricted machineguns because they eliminate the manual movements that a
shooter would otherwise need to make in order to fire continuously” at a high rate of fire, as bump stocks
do. Brief for Petitioners 40. So, ATF reasons, concluding that bump stocks are lawful “simply because the
[trigger] moves back and forth ... would exalt artifice above reality and enable evasion of the federal
machinegun ban.” Id., at 41–42 (internal quotation marks omitted). The dissent endorses a similar view. See
post, at 1634 - 1636. 
The presumption against ineffectiveness cannot do the work that ATF and the dissent ask of it. A law is not
useless merely because it draws a line more narrowly than one of its conceivable statutory purposes might
suggest. Interpreting § 5845(b) to exclude semiautomatic rifles equipped with bump stocks comes nowhere
close to making it useless. Under our reading, § 5845(b) still regulates all traditional machineguns. The fact
that it does not capture other weapons capable of a high rate of fire plainly does not render the *428 law
useless. Moreover, it is difficult to understand how ATF can plausibly argue otherwise, given that its
consistent position for almost a decade in numerous separate decisions was that § 5845(b) does not capture
semiautomatic rifles equipped with bump stocks. See App. 16–68. Curiously, the dissent relegates ATF's
about-face to a footnote, instead pointing to its classification of other devices. See post, at 1634 - 1636, and
n. 6. 
The dissent's additional argument for applying the presumption against ineffectiveness fails on its own
terms. To argue that our interpretation makes § 5845(b) “far less effective,” the dissent highlights that a
shooter with a bump-stock-equipped rifle can achieve a rate of fire that rivals traditional machineguns. Post,
at 1635 - 1636. But, the dissent elsewhere acknowledges that a shooter can do the same with an unmodified
semiautomatic rifle using the manual bump-firing technique. See post, at 1629 - 1630. The dissent thus fails
to prove that our reading makes § 5845(b) “far less effective,” much less ineffective (as is required to
invoke the presumption). In any event, Congress could have linked the definition of “machinegun” to a
weapon's rate of fire, as the dissent would prefer. But, it instead enacted a statute that turns on whether a
weapon can fire more than one shot “automatically ... by a single function of the trigger.” § 5845(b). And,
“it is never our job to rewrite ... statutory text under the banner of speculation about what Congress might
have done.” **1627 Henson v. Santander Consumer USA Inc. , 582 U.S. 79, 89, 137 S.Ct. 1718, 198
L.Ed.2d 177 (2017).9 
III
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals. 
It is so ordered. 
Justice ALITO, concurring.
* * *There is a simple remedy for the disparate treatment of bump stocks and machineguns. Congress can
amend the law—and perhaps would have done so already if ATF had stuck with its earlier interpretation.
Now that the situation is clear, Congress can act. 
10

Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KAGAN and Justice JACKSON join, dissenting.
* * *This is not a hard case. All of the textual evidence points to the same interpretation. A
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle is a machinegun because (1) with a single pull of the trigger, a
shooter can (2) fire continuous shots without any human input beyond maintaining forward pressure. The
majority looks to the internal mechanism that initiates fire, rather than the human act of the shooter's initial
pull, to hold that a “single function of the trigger” means a reset of the trigger mechanism. Its interpretation
requires six diagrams and an animation to decipher the meaning of the statutory text. See ante, at 1620 -
1622, and n. 5. Then, shifting focus from the internal mechanism of the gun to the perspective of the
shooter, the majority holds that continuous forward pressure is too much human input for
bump-stock-enabled continuous fire to be “automatic.”
The majority's reading flies in the face of this Court's standard tools of statutory interpretation. By casting
aside the statute's ordinary meaning both at the time of its enactment and today, the majority eviscerates
Congress's regulation of machineguns and enables gun users and manufacturers to circumvent federal law. 
A
Start with the phrase “single function of the trigger.” All the tools of statutory interpretation, including
dictionary definitions, evidence of contemporaneous usage, and this Court's prior interpretation, point to
that phrase meaning the initiation of the firing sequence by an act of the shooter, whether via a pull, push,
or switch of the firing mechanism. The majority nevertheless interprets “function of the trigger” as **1631
“the mode of action by which the trigger activates the firing mechanism.” Ante, at 1620. Because in a
bump-stock-equipped *436 semiautomatic rifle, the trigger's internal mechanism must reset each time a
weapon fires, the majority reads each reset as a new “function.” That reading fixates on a firearm's internal
mechanics while ignoring the human act on the trigger referenced by the statute.
 
Consider the relevant dictionary definitions. In 1934, when Congress passed the National Firearms Act,
“function” meant “the mode of action by which [something] fulfils its purpose.” 4 Oxford English
Dictionary 602 (1933). A “trigger” meant the “movable catch or lever” that “sets some force or mechanism
in action.” 11 id., at 357. The majority agrees with those definitions. Ante, at 1620. It errs, however, by
maintaining a myopic focus on a trigger's mechanics rather than on how a shooter uses a trigger to initiate
fire. Ibid. 
Nothing about those definitions suggests that “function of the trigger” means the mechanism by which the
trigger resets mechanically to fire a second shot. See ante, at 1620 - 1622 (explaining the interior mechanics
of an AR–15 trigger mechanism), as opposed to the process that a pull of the trigger on a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle sets in motion. The most important “function” of a “trigger” is
what it enables a shooter to do; what “force or mechanism” it sets “in action.” 11 Oxford English
Dictionary, at 357. A “single function of the trigger” more naturally means a single initiation of the firing
sequence. Regardless of what is happening in the internal mechanics of a firearm, if a shooter must activate
the trigger only a single time to initiate a firing sequence that will shoot “automatically more than one shot,”
that firearm is a “machinegun.” § 5845(b). 
Evidence of contemporaneous usage overwhelmingly supports that interpretation. The term “ ‘function of
the trigger’ ” was proposed by the president of the National Rifle Association (NRA) during a hearing on
the National Firearms Act before the House. See National Firearms Act: Hearings on H. R. 9066 before the
House Committee on Ways *437 and Means, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., 38–40 (1934). He understood the
“distinguishing feature of a machine gun [to be] that by a single pull of the trigger the gun continues to fire.”
Id., at 40. He emphasized that a firearm “which is capable of firing more than one shot by a single pull of
11

the trigger, a single function of the trigger, is properly regarded ... as a machine gun.” Ibid. Distinguishing
a machinegun from a pistol, the NRA president emphasized that for a pistol “[y]ou must release the trigger
and pull it again for the second shot to be fired.” Id., at 41. He did not say “the hammer slips off the
disconnector just as the square point of the trigger rises into the notch on the hammer ... thereby reset[ting
the trigger mechanism] to the original position.” Ante, at 1622. He instead emphasized the action of the
shooter, who must repeatedly activate the trigger for each shot. Predictably, the House and Senate Reports
reflect the same understanding of the phrase. See H. R. Rep. No. 1780, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., 2 (1934)
(reporting that the statute “contains the usual definition of machine gun as a weapon designed to shoot more
than one shot without reloading and by a single pull of the trigger”); S. Rep. No. 1444, 73d Cong., 2d Sess.,
2 (1934) (same). 
The majority cannot disregard these statements as evidence of legislative purpose. They are, along with
contemporaneous **1632 dictionary definitions, some of the best evidence of contemporaneous
understanding. Cf. McDonald v. Chicago , 561 U.S. 742, 828, 130 S.Ct. 3020, 177 L.Ed.2d 894 (2010)
(THOMAS, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (“Statements by legislators can assist ... to
the extent they demonstrate the manner in which the public used or understood a particular word or
phrase”). Indeed, at oral argument, when asked what evidence there was “that as of 1934, the ordinary
understanding of the *438 phrase ‘function of the trigger’ referred to the mechanics of the gun rather than
... the shooter's motion,” respondent's lawyer could not point to a single piece of evidence that supports the
majority's reading. Tr. of Oral Arg. 98; see id., at 98–101. He even agreed that Congress used the word
“function” to ensure that the statute covered a wide variety of trigger mechanisms, including both push and
pull triggers. Id., at 101–102. In short, the majority disregards the unrefuted evidence of the text's ordinary
and contemporaneous meaning, substituting instead its own understanding of the internal mechanics of an
AR–15 without looking at the actions of the shooter. 
This Court itself has also previously read the definition of “machinegun” in this exact statute to refer to the
action of the shooter rather than the firing mechanism. In Staples v. United States, 511 U.S. 600, 114 S.Ct.
1793, 128 L.Ed.2d 608 (1994), the Court noted that “a weapon that fires repeatedly with a single pull of the
trigger” is a machinegun, as opposed to “a weapon that fires only one shot with each pull of the trigger,”
which is (at most) a semiautomatic firearm. Id., at 602, n. 1, 114 S.Ct. 1793 (emphasis added). A “pull” of
the trigger necessarily requires human input. 
When a shooter initiates the firing sequence on a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle, he does so with
“a single function of the trigger” under that term's ordinary meaning. Just as the shooter of an M16 need
only pull the trigger and maintain backward pressure (on the trigger), a shooter of a bump-stock-equipped
AR–15 need only pull the trigger and maintain forward pressure (on the gun). Both shooters pull the trigger
only once to fire multiple shots. The only difference is that for an M16, the shooter's backward pressure
makes the rifle fire continuously because of an internal mechanism: The curved lever of the trigger does
not move. In a bump-stock-equipped AR–15, the mechanism for continuous fire is external: The shooter's
forward pressure moves the curved lever back and forth against his stationary trigger finger. Both rifles
require only one initial *439 action (that is, one “single function of the trigger”) from the shooter combined
with continuous pressure to activate continuous fire.
The majority resists this ordinary understanding of the term “function of the trigger” with two technical
arguments. First, it attempts to contrast the action required to fire an M16 from that required to fire a
bump-stock-equipped AR–15. The majority argues that “holding the trigger down on a fully automatic rifle
is not manual input in addition to a trigger's function—it is what causes the trigger to function in the first
place” whereas “pushing on the front grip [of a bump-stock equipped semiautomatic rifle] will not cause
the weapon to fire unless the shooter also engages the trigger with his other hand.” The shooter of a
bump-stock-equipped AR–15, however, need not “pull” the trigger to fire. Instead, he need only place a
12

finger on the finger rest and push forward on the front grip or barrel with his other hand. Instead of pulling
the trigger, the forward motion pushes the bump stock into his finger. 
Second, the majority tries to cabin “single function of the trigger” to a single mechanism for activating
continuous fire. See ante, at 1623 - 1624. A shooter can fire a bump-stock-equipped  semiautomatic rifle
in two ways. First, he can choose to fire single shots via distinct pulls of the trigger without exerting any
additional pressure. Second, he can fire continuously via maintaining constant forward pressure on the
barrel or front grip. The majority holds that the forward pressure cannot constitute a “single function of the
trigger” because a shooter can also fire single shots by pulling the trigger. That logic, however, would also
exclude a Tommy Gun and an M16, the paradigmatic examples of regulated machineguns in 1934 and
today. Both weapons can fire either automatically or semiautomatically. A shooter using a Tommy Gun in
automatic mode could choose to fire single shots with distinct pulls of the trigger, or continuous shots by
maintaining constant backward pressure on the trigger. See supra, at 1628. An M16 user can toggle the
weapon from semiautomatic mode, which allows only one shot per pull of the trigger, to automatic mode,
which enables continuous fire. See M16 Field Manual, Section III, p. 4-8. In 1934 as now, there is no
commonsense difference between a firearm where a shooter must hold down a trigger or flip a switch to
initiate rapid fire and one where a shooter must push on the front grip or barrel to do the same. 
The majority's logic simply does not overcome the overwhelming textual and contextual evidence that
“single function of the trigger” means a single action by the shooter to initiate a firing sequence, including
pulling a trigger and pushing forward on a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle. 
B
Next, consider what makes a machinegun “automatic.” A bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle is a
“machinegun” because with a “single function of the trigger” it “shoot[s], automatically more than one shot,
without manual reloading.” § 5845(b). Put simply, the bump stock automates the process of firing more than
one shot.
 
*441 Before automatic weapons, a person who wanted to fire multiple shots from a firearm had to do two
things after pulling the trigger the first time: (1) he had to reload the gun; and (2) he had to pull the trigger
again. A semiautomatic weapon like an AR–15 already automates the first process. The bump stock
automates the second. 5 In **1634 a fully automatic rifle like an M16, that automation is internal. After a
shooter pulls the trigger, if he maintains continuous backward pressure on the trigger, the curved lever itself
will not move. Instead, an internal mechanism allows continuous fire. On a bump-stock-equipped
semiautomatic rifle, the automation is external. After a shooter pulls the trigger, if he maintains continuous
forward pressure on the gun, the bump stock harnesses the recoil to move the curved lever back and forth
against his finger. That external automated motion creates continuous fire. 
When a shooter “bump” fires a semiautomatic weapon without a bump stock, he must control several things
using his own strength and skill: (1) the backward recoil of each shot, including both the direction in which
the rifle moves and how far it moves when recoiling; (2) the trigger finger, by maintaining a stationary
position with a loose enough hold on the trigger that the rapidly moving gun will hit his finger each time;
and (3) the forward motion of the rifle after it recoils backward. A bump stock automates those processes.
The replacement stock controls the direction and distance of the recoil, and the finger rest obviates the need
to maintain a stationary finger position. All a shooter must do is rest his finger and press forward on the
front grip or barrel for the rifle to fire continuously. 
The majority nevertheless concludes that a bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle requires too much
human input to fire “automatic[ally]” because it requires the “proper amount of forward pressure on the
13

front grip” to maintain continuous fire. Ante, at 1625. “Automati[c],” however, does not mean zero human
input. An M16 requires the shooter to exert the “proper amount of [backward] pressure on the” trigger to
maintain continuous fire. Ibid. So, too, a machinegun that requires a user to hold down a button. Makers
of automatic weapons may require continuous human input for safety purposes; an accidental trigger pull
that activates rapid fire is less harmful if it does not require affirmative human action to stop. Requiring
continuous pressure for continuous fire, however, does not prevent a firearm from “shoot[ing],
automatically more than one shot.” § 5845(b). 
C
This Court has repeatedly avoided interpretations of a statute that would facilitate its ready “evasion” or
“enable offenders to elude its provisions in the most easy manner.” Justice Scalia called this interpretive
principle the “presumption against ineffectiveness.” The majority arrogates Congress's policymaking role
to itself by allowing bump-stock users to circumvent Congress's ban on weapons that shoot rapidly via a
single action of the shooter.
 
“The presumption against ineffectiveness ensures that a text's manifest purpose is furthered, not hindered.”
Ibid.  Before machineguns, a shooter could fire a gun only as fast as his finger could pull the trigger.
Congress sought to restrict the civilian use of machineguns because they eliminated the need for a person
rapidly to pull the trigger himself to fire continuously. A bump stock serves that function. Even a skilled
sport shooter can fire an AR–15 at a rate of only 180 rounds per minute by rapidly pulling the trigger.
Anyone shooting a bump-stock-equipped AR–15 can fire at a rate between 400 and 800 rounds per minute
with a single pull of the trigger. 
Moreover, bump stocks are not the only devices that transform semiautomatic rifles into weapons capable
of rapid fire with a single function of the trigger. Recognizing the creativity of gun owners and
manufacturers, Congress wrote a statute “loaded with anticircumvention devices.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 68. The
definition of “machinegun” captures “any weapon which shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily
restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the
trigger.” § 5845(b). Not “more than four, five, or six shots,” not “single pull” or “single push” of the trigger.
Following that definition, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) has reasonably
classified many transformative devices other than bump stocks as “machinegun[s].”6 For instance, ATF has
long classified “forced reset triggers” as machineguns. See Brief for Petitioners 28. A forced *444  reset
trigger includes a device that forces the trigger back downward after the shooter's initial pull, repeatedly
pushing the curved lever against the shooter's stationary trigger finger. See ibid. To a shooter, a
semiautomatic rifle equipped with a forced reset trigger feels much like an M16. He must pull the trigger
only once and then maintain pressure to achieve continuous fire. See ibid. 
Gun owners themselves also have built motorized devices that will repeatedly pull a semiautomatic firearm's
curved lever to enable continuous fire. ATF has classified such devices as “machinegun[s]” since 1982. See
Record 1077. In 2003, the Fifth Circuit held that such a contraption qualified as a “machinegun” under the
statute. See United States v. Camp , 343 F.3d 743, 745 . An owner of a semiautomatic rifle had placed a
fishing reel inside the weapon's trigger guard. Id., at 744 . When he pulled a switch behind the original
trigger, the switch supplied power to a motor connected to the fishing reel. Ibid. The motor caused the reel
to rotate, and that rotation manipulated the curved lever, causing it to fire in rapid succession. Ibid. ATF
in 2017 also classified as a “machinegun” a wearable glove that a shooter could activate to initiate a
mechanized piston moving back and forth, repeatedly pulling and releasing a semiautomatic rifle's curved
lever. See Record 1074–1076.
The majority tosses aside the presumption against ineffectiveness, claiming that its interpretation only
14

“draws a line more narrowly than one of [Congress's] conceivable statutory purposes might suggest”
because the statute still regulates  “all traditional machineguns” like M16s. Ante, at 1626. Congress's ban
on M16s, however, is far less effective if a shooter can instead purchase a bump stock or construct a device
that enables his AR–15 to fire at the same rate. Even bump-stock manufacturers recognize that they are
exploiting a loophole, with one bragging on its website “Bumpfire Stocks are the closest you can get to full
a u t o  a n d  s t i l l  b e  l e g a l . ”  M i d s o u t h  S h o o t e r s ,  B U M P F I R E  S Y S T E M S ,
https://www.midsouthshooterssupply.com/b/bumpfiresystems. The majority creates a definition of the
statute that bans only “traditional” machineguns, even though its definition renders Congress's clear intent
readily evadable. 
Every Member of the majority has previously emphasized that the best way to respect congressional intent
is to adhere to the ordinary understanding of the terms Congress uses. * * * Today, the majority forgets that
principle and substitutes its own view of what constitutes a “machinegun” for Congress's. 
* * *
Congress's definition of “machinegun” encompasses bump stocks just as naturally as M16s. Just like a
person can shoot “automatically more than one shot” with an M16 through a “single function of the trigger”
if he maintains continuous backward pressure on the trigger, he can do the same with a
bump-stock-equipped semiautomatic rifle if he maintains forward pressure on the gun. § 5845(b). Today's
decision to reject that ordinary understanding will have deadly consequences. The majority's artificially
narrow definition hamstrings the Government's efforts to **1637 keep machineguns from gunmen like the
Las Vegas shooter. I respectfully dissent.
15