1 
 
Train v. Colorado Public Interest Research Group, Inc. 
 
Supreme Court of the United States 
426 U.S. 1 (1976) 
 
■ Justice Marshall delivered the opinion of the Court. 
 
The issue in this case is whether the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has the authority 
under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA), as amended in 1972, 86 Stat. 816, 33 
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (1970 ed., Supp. IV), to regulate the discharge into the Nation’s waterways 
of nuclear waste materials [that would also be] subject to regulation by the Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC) and its successors under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (AEA). 68 Stat. 
919, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq. In statutory terms, the question is whether these 
nuclear materials are “pollutants” within the meaning of the FWPCA. . . . 
 
II 
 
Since 1946, when the first Atomic Energy Act was passed, 60 Stat. 755, the Federal Government 
has exercised control over the production and use of atomic energy through the AEC. . . . Under 
the AEA, private parties are permitted to engage in the production of atomic energy for industrial 
or commercial purposes, but only in accordance with licenses issued by the AEC . . . in the 
furtherance of the purposes of the Act. 42 U.S.C. § 2133. 
 
The comprehensive regulatory scheme created by the AEA embraces the production, possession, 
and use of three types of radioactive materials—source material,2 special nuclear material,3 and 
byproduct material.4 In carrying out its regulatory duties under the AEA, the AEC is authorized 
to establish “such standards . . . as [it] may deem necessary or desirable . . . to protect health or to 
minimize danger to life or property.” 42 U.S.C. § 2201(b). Pursuant to this authority, the AEC 
. . . has established by regulation maximum permissible releases of source, byproduct, and 
special nuclear materials into the environment by licensees. The regulations further provide that 
licensees should, in addition to complying with the established limits, “make every reasonable 
effort to maintain . . . releases of radioactive materials in effluents . . . as low as is reasonably 
achievable.” 10 CFR § 20.1(c) (1976). Similarly, the regulations require that nuclear facilities be 
designed to keep levels of radioactive material in effluents “as low as is reasonably achievable.” 
10 CFR § 50.34a (1976). 
 
The FWPCA established a regulatory program to control and abate water pollution, stating as its 
ultimate objective the elimination of all discharges of “pollutants” into the navigable waters by 
1985. In furtherance of this objective, the FWPCA calls for the achievement of effluent 
limitations that require applications of the “best practicable control technology currently 
available” by July 1, 1977, and the “best available technology economically achievable” by July 
1, 1983. 33 U.S.C. § 1311(b) (1970 ed., Supp. IV). These effluent limitations are enforced 
through a permit program. The discharge of “pollutants” into water is unlawful without a permit 
issued by the Administrator of the EPA or, if a State has developed a program that complies with 
the FWPCA, by the State. 33 U.S.C. §§ 1311(a), 1342 (1970 ed., Supp. IV). 
 

2 
 
The term “pollutant” is defined by the FWPCA to include, inter alia, “radioactive materials.” [33 
U.S.C. § 1362(6) (1970 ed., Supp. IV)].7 But when the Administrator of the EPA adopted 
regulations governing the permit program, 40 CFR, pt. 125 (1975), he specifically excluded 
source, byproduct, and special nuclear materials—those covered by the AEA—from the program 
upon his understanding of the relevant legislative history of the FWPCA: 
 
“The legislative history of the Act reflects that the term ‘radioactive materials’ as included within 
the definition of ‘pollutant’ in section 502 of the Act covers only radioactive materials which are 
not encompassed in the definition of source, byproduct, or special nuclear materials as defined 
by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and regulated pursuant to the latter Act. 
Examples of radioactive materials not covered by the Atomic Energy Act and, therefore, 
included within the term ‘pollutant’ are radium and accelerator produced isotopes.” 40 CFR 
§ 125.1(y) (1975) (citations omitted). . . . The question we are presented with, then, is whether 
source, byproduct, and special nuclear materials are “pollutants” within the meaning of the 
FWPCA. 
 
III 
 
The Court of Appeals resolved the question exclusively by reference to the language of the 
statute. It observed that the FWPCA defines “pollution” as “the man-made or man-induced 
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.” 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1362(19) (1970 ed., Supp. IV). And it noted that the reference to “radioactive materials” in the 
definition of “pollutant” was without express qualification or exception. . . . 
 
To the extent that the Court of Appeals excluded reference to the legislative history of the 
FWPCA in discerning its meaning, the court was in error. As we have noted before: “When aid 
to construction of the meaning of words, as used in the statute, is available, there certainly can be 
no ‘rule of law’ which forbids its use, however clear the words may appear on ‘superficial 
examination.’ ” United States v. American Trucking Assns., 310 U.S. 534, 543–544 (1940) 
(footnotes omitted). . . . 
 
IV 
 
The legislative history of the FWPCA speaks with force to the question whether source, 
byproduct, and special nuclear materials are “pollutants” subject to the Act’s permit program. 
The House Committee Report was quite explicit on the subject: 
 
“The term ‘pollutant’ as defined in the bill includes ‘radioactive materials.’ These materials are 
those not encompassed in the definition of source, byproduct, or special nuclear materials as 
defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and regulated pursuant to that Act. 
‘Radioactive materials’ encompassed by this bill are those beyond the jurisdiction of the Atomic 
Energy Commission. Examples of radioactive material not covered by the Atomic Energy Act, 
and, therefore, included within the term ‘pollutant,’ are radium and accelerator produced 
isotopes.” H.R. Rep. No. 92–911, p. 131 (1972). 
 

3 
 
The definition of “pollutant” in the House version of the bill, H.R. 11896, 92d Cong., 2d Sess., 
§ 502(6) (1972), contained the same broad reference to “radioactive materials” as did the 
definition in the Senate bill, S. 2770, 92d Cong., 1st Sess., § 502(f) (1971), and the bill 
ultimately enacted as the FWPCA; for our purposes the definitions are identical. . . . Thus, the 
House Committee, describing the import of the precise statutory language with which we are 
concerned, cautioned that the definition of “pollutant” did not include those radioactive materials 
subject to regulation under the AEA. . . . 
 
A colloquy on the Senate floor between Senator Pastore, the Chairman of the Joint Committee on 
Atomic Energy, and Senator Muskie, the FWPCA’s primary author, provides a strong indication 
that Congress did not intend the FWPCA to alter the AEC’s control over the discharge of source, 
byproduct, and special nuclear materials. Senator Pastore, referring to the need to define what 
materials are “subject to control requirements” under the FWPCA, noted that the definition of 
“pollutant” included the words “radioactive materials.” 2 Leg. Hist. 1265. The following 
exchange then took place: 
 
“MR. PASTORE. . . . 
 
“My question is this: Does this measure that has been reported by the committee in any 
way affect the existing law, that is, the existing Atomic Energy Act of 1954, insofar as 
the regulatory powers of the AEC are concerned with reference to radioactive material? 
 
“MR. MUSKIE. It does not; and it is not the intent of this act to affect the 1954 
legislation. 
 
“MR. PASTORE. In other words, this bill does not change that feature of the Atomic 
Energy Act in any regard? 
 
“MR. MUSKIE. That is correct. 
 
“MR. PASTORE. I thank the Senator. 
 
“MR. MUSKIE. May I say in addition, that legislation dealing with the setting of effluent 
limitations as they involve nuclear powerplants is now pending in the courts. The Senator 
is aware of that litigation. 
 
“For example, a recent decision of the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, in 
the case of Northern States Power and Light versus Minnesota, raises the issue. I would 
like to point out that the committee considered speaking specifically to that decision, but 
chose to remain silent so as not to prejudice the decision or any appeal from it. 
 
“MR. PASTORE. Yes. As a matter of fact, that decision held that the Federal 
Government did pre-empt in this field under existing law. That is the opinion, and we 
hope this legislation does not change that opinion in any way, and does not affect existing 
law. That is all I am concerned with. 
 

4 
 
“MR. MUSKIE. The Senator is correct in his evaluation of the legislation on that point.” 
 
Respondents contend that this colloquy “merely reiterates that the FWPCA does not alter the 
regulatory authority of the AEC” over source, byproduct, and special nuclear materials. Brief for 
Respondents 40–41. The exchange, they assert, says nothing about the EPA’s authority to 
regulate the same materials. The discussion is consistent, they claim, with their position that the 
AEC must defer to the EPA in the setting of effluent limitations for AEA-regulated materials—
that, for example, NRC licenses must conform to permits issued under the FWPCA. We 
disagree. 
 
The thrust of Senator Muskie’s assurances that the FWPCA would not “in any way affect” the 
regulatory powers of the AEC was, we think, that the AEC was to retain full authority to regulate 
the materials covered by the AEA, unaltered by the exercise of regulatory authority by any 
agency under the FWPCA. This conclusion is reinforced by Senator Muskie’s reference to the 
case of Northern States Power Co. v. Minnesota, 447 F.2d 1143 (CA8 1971). In that case, which 
was subsequently affirmed summarily by this Court, 405 U.S. 1035 (1972), the Eighth Circuit 
had held that the AEA created a pervasive regulatory scheme, vesting exclusive authority to 
regulate the discharge of radioactive effluents from nuclear power plants in the AEC, and pre-
empting the States from regulating such discharges. The absence of any room for a state role 
under the AEA in setting limits on radioactive discharges from nuclear power plants stands in 
sharp contrast to the scheme created by the FWPCA, which envisions the development of state 
permit programs, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342(b), (c) (1970 ed., Supp. IV), and allows the States to adopt 
effluent limitations more stringent than those required or established under the FWPCA. 33 
U.S.C. § 1370 (1970 ed., Supp. IV). See also 33 U.S.C. §§ 1311(b)(1)(C), 1314(b), 1316(c), 
1341(a)(1) (1970 ed., Supp. IV).) Senator Muskie’s specific assurance to Senator Pastore that the 
FWPCA would not affect existing law as interpreted in Northern States can only be viewed, we 
think, as an indication that the exclusive regulatory scheme created by the AEA for source, 
byproduct, and special nuclear materials was to remain unaltered. 
 
In the course of the House’s consideration of the FWPCA, an unsuccessful attempt was made to 
alter the AEA’s scheme for regulating the discharge of the radioactive materials involved in this 
case. Representative Wolff proposed to amend what is now 33 U.S.C. § 1370 (1970 ed., Supp. 
IV), which gives States the authority to set more stringent limits on the discharge of pollutants, 
by adding a paragraph giving the States the authority to regulate the discharge of radioactive 
wastes from nuclear power plants. The debate on that amendment and its defeat by a 3-to-1 vote 
provide solid support for the conclusion that the FWPCA’s grant of regulatory authority to the 
EPA and the States did not encompass the control of AEA-regulated materials. 
 
The Wolff amendment, according to its author, would “give the States a voice in deciding what 
kinds and amounts of such radioactive wastes may be discharged into their waters.” 1 Leg. Hist. 
544. In explaining the need for such an amendment, Representative Wolff noted that the time 
had come “to seriously consider standards more stringent than those promulgated by the AEC.” 
Id., at 545. Representative Frenzel, a co-sponsor of the amendment, pictured it as an attempt to 
alter the result in the Northern States case. The AEC, he explained, could not be expected to 
protect the health and safety of the public as effectively as the States, because “the AEC has a 
dual mission[,] that of promotion as well as safety.” 1 Leg. Hist. 548. 

5 
 
 
The opponents of the Wolff amendment voiced strong opposition to the transfer of the AEC’s 
regulatory authority to the States or to the EPA. Representative Stanton, a Member of the House 
Committee on Public Works, which reported the House bill, stated: 
 
“The amendment presents the House with a very complex and difficult proposition. It proposes 
to take authority for the setting of pollution control standards from the AEC and places it in the 
hands of EPA. For normal operations involving pollution, that control properly belongs under 
EPA. But atomic energy is a peculiar field. To date, the operation of the atomic energy program 
has been under the control of the Commission itself. Eventually, such control will be delegated 
to the States as more and more knowledgeable people at the State level become involved in the 
atomic energy program. That time, however, has not yet arrived. Until we reach that stage it is 
obvious that the control of which we speak should remain with the Atomic Energy Commission 
itself, as the committee points out [in the House Report] which accompanies this bill. For this 
reason, I would oppose the amendment offered by my distinguished colleague.” Id., at 554–
555. . . . 
 
Representative McCormack, a Member of the House Committee on Public Works and Chairman 
of the House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Task Force on Energy Research and 
Development, urged the amendment’s defeat in similar terms. After noting the inadvisability of 
“throwing away” the AEC’s “meticulous work” in the area of safety in favor of state regulation, 
he concluded: 
 
“[I]t is obvious from the report by the House Committee on Public Works for this bill, and from 
the committee report from the other body that this bill does not impact directly upon the Atomic 
Energy Act of 1954. This bill applies only to radioactive materials not covered by the Atomic 
Energy Act of 1954 and, as such, the amendment is not relevant to this bill at all.” Id., at 551. 
 
Respondents urge that the Wolff amendment was addressed only to the question of the States’ 
regulatory authority, and that its defeat did not reflect any intent to foreclose regulation of 
source, byproduct, and special nuclear materials by the EPA. We do not agree that the House’s 
consideration of the Wolff amendment leaves room for EPA regulation. Several of the opponents 
of the amendment were quite explicit in their reliance upon the House Committee Report’s 
statement that radioactive materials subject to AEA regulation were excluded from the coverage 
of the FWPCA. Neither Representative Wolff nor Representative Frenzel took issue with that 
interpretation in the course of the debate on their amendment, and indeed it is arguable that their 
amendment was premised on the assumption that source, byproduct, and special nuclear 
materials were wholly beyond the scope of the FWPCA. If these materials were covered by the 
Act—that is, if they were “pollutants”—the amendment was wholly superfluous, for the 
unamended [version of the FWPCA] would permit the States to regulate their discharge. . . . In 
our view, then, the House’s consideration and rejection of the Wolff amendment offers 
additional support for the interpretation stated in the House Committee Report that source, 
byproduct, and special nuclear materials are beyond the reach of the FWPCA. 
 
The House’s rather explicit statement of intent to exclude AEA-regulated materials from the 
FWPCA was unchallenged by the Conference Committee, which simply retained the same 

6 
 
reference to “radioactive materials” contained in both the House and Senate bills. S. Conf. Rep. 
No. 92–1236, p. 144 (1972). Representative Harsha, a ranking member of the Conference 
Committee, explained the import of the Conference Committee action as follows: 
 
“The conference report does not change the original intent as it was made clear in the 
colloquy between Senators Muskie and Pastore in the course of the debate in the other 
body. I also note that an amendment to H.R. 11896 was offered on March 28, 1972, 
which would have overturned the Northern States Power against Minnesota case. 
 
“The distinguished gentleman from California (Mr. Holifield) spoke in opposition to the 
amendment and pointed out the necessity of not changing the careful division of authority 
between the States and the Federal Government over nuclear materials and facilities as 
enunciated in the Northern States case. The amendment was defeated by a 3-to-1 vote of 
the House. 
 
“I can say to the gentleman from Illinois that the managers in no way detracted from the 
intent of the language in H.R. 11896. I also note that the Committee on Public Works in 
its report [states] . . . that the term ‘pollutant’ as defined in the bill includes ‘radioactive 
materials.’ These materials are not those encompassed in the definition of source, 
byproduct, or special nuclear materials as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended, and regulated pursuant to that act. ‘Radioactive materials’ encompassed by this 
bill are those beyond the jurisdiction of the Atomic Energy Commission. Examples of 
radioactive materials not covered by the Atomic Energy Act, and, therefore, included 
within the term ‘pollutant’ are radium and accelerator produced isotopes. This language 
adequately reflects the intent of the managers of the conference report.” Id., 226–227. 
 
With no one expressing a different view of the Conference action, the House proceeded to agree 
to the Conference Report. 
 
V 
 
If it was not clear at the outset, we think it abundantly clear after a review of the legislative 
materials that reliance on the “plain meaning” of the words “radioactive materials” contained in 
the definition of “pollutant” in the FWPCA contributes little to our understanding of whether 
Congress intended the Act to encompass the regulation of source, byproduct, and special nuclear 
materials. To have included these materials under the FWPCA would have marked a significant 
alteration of the pervasive regulatory scheme embodied in the AEA. Far from containing the 
clear indication of legislative intent that we might expect before recognizing such a change in 
policy, the legislative history reflects, on balance, an intention to preserve the pre-existing 
regulatory plan. 
 
We conclude, therefore, that the “pollutants” subject to regulation under the FWPCA do not 
include source, byproduct, and special nuclear materials, and that the EPA Administrator has 
acted in accordance with his statutory mandate in declining to regulate the discharge of such 
materials. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is 
 

7 
 
Reversed. 
 
■ Mr. Justice Stevens took no part in the consideration or decision of this case. 