1 
 
Rucho v. Common Cause 
 
139 S. Ct. 2484 (2019) 
 
Chief Justice Roberts delivered the opinion of the Court. 
 
Voters and other plaintiffs in North Carolina and Maryland challenged their States’ 
congressional districting maps as unconstitutional partisan gerrymanders. The North Carolina 
plaintiffs complained that the State’s districting plan discriminated against Democrats; the 
Maryland plaintiffs complained that their State’s plan discriminated against Republicans. The 
plaintiffs alleged that the gerrymandering violated the First Amendment, the Equal Protection 
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Elections Clause, and Article I, §2, of the 
Constitution. The District Courts in both cases ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, and the defendants 
appealed directly to this Court. 
 
These cases require us to consider once again whether claims of excessive partisanship in 
districting are “justiciable”—that is, properly suited for resolution by the federal courts. This 
Court has not previously struck down a districting plan as an unconstitutional partisan 
gerrymander, and has struggled without success over the past several decades to discern 
judicially manageable standards for deciding such claims. The districting plans at issue here are 
highly partisan, by any measure. The question is whether the courts below appropriately 
exercised judicial power when they found them unconstitutional as well. 
 
I 
 
The first case involves a challenge to the congressional redistricting plan enacted by the 
Republican-controlled North Carolina General Assembly in 2016. The Republican legislators 
leading the redistricting effort instructed their mapmaker to use political data to draw a map that 
would produce a congressional delegation of ten Republicans and three Democrats. As one of the 
two Republicans chairing the redistricting committee stated, “I think electing Republicans is 
better than electing Democrats. So I drew this map to help foster what I think is better for the 
country.” He further explained that the map was drawn with the aim of electing ten Republicans 
and three Democrats because he did “not believe it [would be] possible to draw a map with 11 
Republicans and 2 Democrats.” One Democratic state senator objected that entrenching the 10-3 
advantage for Republicans was not “fair, reasonable, [or] balanced” because, as recently as 2012, 
“Democratic congressional candidates had received more votes on a statewide basis than 
Republican candidates.” The General Assembly was not swayed by that objection and approved 
the 2016 Plan by a party-line vote. 
 
In November 2016, North Carolina conducted congressional elections using the 2016 Plan, and 
Republican candidates won 10 of the 13 congressional districts. In the 2018 elections, 
Republican candidates won nine congressional districts, while Democratic candidates won three. 
The Republican candidate narrowly prevailed in the remaining district, but the State Board of 
Elections called a new election after allegations of fraud. 
 

2 
 
The second case before us is Lamone v. Benisek. In 2011, the Maryland Legislature—dominated 
by Democrats—undertook to redraw the lines of that State’s eight congressional districts. The 
Governor at the time, Democrat Martin O’Malley, led the process. He appointed a redistricting 
committee to help redraw the map, and asked Congressman Steny Hoyer, who has described 
himself as a “serial gerrymanderer,” to advise the committee. The Governor later testified that 
his aim was to “use the redistricting process to change the overall composition of Maryland’s 
congressional delegation to 7 Democrats and 1 Republican by flipping” one district. The map 
was adopted by a party-line vote. It was used in the 2012 election and succeeded in flipping the 
Sixth District. A Democrat has held the seat ever since. 
 
II 
 
Article III of the Constitution limits federal courts to deciding “Cases” and “Controversies.” We 
have understood that limitation to mean that federal courts can address only questions 
“historically viewed as capable of resolution through the judicial process.” In these cases we are 
asked to decide an important question of constitutional law. “But before we do so, we must find 
that the question is presented in a ‘case’ or ‘controversy’ that is, in James Madison’s words, ‘of a 
Judiciary Nature.’” 
 
Chief Justice Marshall famously wrote that it is “the province and duty of the judicial department 
to say what the law is.” Marbury v. Madison (1803). Sometimes, however, “the law is that the 
judicial department has no business entertaining the claim of unlawfulness— because the 
question is entrusted to one of the political branches or involves no judicially enforceable rights.” 
In such a case the claim is said to present a “political question” and to be nonjusticiable—outside 
the courts’ competence and therefore beyond the courts’ jurisdiction. Baker v. Carr (1962). 
Among the political question cases the Court has identified are those that lack “judicially 
discoverable and manageable standards for resolving [them].” 
 
Partisan gerrymandering is nothing new. Nor is frustration with it. The practice was known in the 
Colonies prior to Independence, and the Framers were familiar with it at the time of the drafting 
and ratification of the Constitution. During the very first congressional elections, George 
Washington and his Federalist allies accused Patrick Henry of trying to gerrymander Virginia’s 
districts against their candidates—in particular James Madison, who ultimately prevailed over 
fellow future President James Monroe. In 1812, Governor of Massachusetts and future Vice 
President Elbridge Gerry notoriously approved congressional districts that the legislature had 
drawn to aid the Democratic-Republican Party. The moniker “gerrymander” was born when an 
outraged Federalist newspaper observed that one of the misshapen districts resembled a 
salamander. “By 1840, the gerrymander was a recognized force in party politics and was 
generally attempted in all legislation enacted for the formation of election districts. It was 
generally conceded that each party would attempt to gain power which was not proportionate to 
its numerical strength.” 
 
The Framers addressed the election of Representatives to Congress in the Elections Clause. Art. 
I, §4, cl. 1. That provision assigns to state legislatures the power to prescribe the “Times, Places 
and Manner of holding Elections” for Members of Congress, while giving Congress the power to 
“make or alter” any such regulations. Congress has regularly exercised its Elections Clause 

3 
 
power, including to address partisan gerrymandering. The Apportionment Act of 1842, which 
required single-member districts for the first time, specified that those districts be “composed of 
contiguous territory.” 
 
The Framers were aware of electoral districting problems and considered what to do about them. 
They settled on a characteristic approach, assigning the issue to the state legislatures, expressly 
checked and balanced by the Federal Congress. 
 
Courts have nevertheless been called upon to resolve a variety of questions surrounding 
districting. Early on, doubts were raised about the competence of the federal courts to resolve 
those questions. 
 
To hold that legislators cannot take partisan interests into account when drawing district lines 
would essentially countermand the Framers’ decision to entrust districting to political entities. 
The “central problem” is not determining whether a jurisdiction has engaged in partisan 
gerrymandering. It is “determining when political gerrymandering has gone too far.” 
 
III 
 
In considering whether partisan gerrymandering claims are justiciable, we are mindful of Justice 
Kennedy’s counsel in Vieth [v. Jubelirer]: Any standard for resolving such claims must be 
grounded in a “limited and precise rationale” and be “clear, manageable, and politically neutral.” 
An important reason for those careful constraints is that, as a Justice with extensive experience in 
state and local politics put it, “[t]he opportunity to control the drawing of electoral boundaries 
through the legislative process of apportionment is a critical and traditional part of politics in the 
United States.” An expansive standard requiring “the correction of all election district lines 
drawn for partisan reasons would commit federal and state courts to unprecedented intervention 
in the American political process.” 
 
As noted, the question is one of degree: How to “provid[e] a standard for deciding how much 
partisan dominance is too much.” And it is vital in such circumstances that the Court act only in 
accord with especially clear standards: “With uncertain limits, intervening courts—even when 
proceeding with best intentions—would risk assuming political, not legal, responsibility for a 
process that often produces ill will and distrust.” If federal courts are to “inject [themselves] into 
the most heated partisan issues” by adjudicating partisan gerrymandering claims, they must be 
armed with a standard that can reliably differentiate unconstitutional from “constitutional 
political gerrymandering.” 
 
Partisan gerrymandering claims rest on an instinct that groups with a certain level of political 
support should enjoy a commensurate level of political power and influence. Explicitly or 
implicitly, a districting map is alleged to be unconstitutional because it makes it too difficult for 
one party to translate statewide support into seats in the legislature. But such a claim is based on 
a “norm that does not exist” in our electoral system—“statewide elections for representatives 
along party lines.” 
 

4 
 
Partisan gerrymandering claims invariably sound in a desire for proportional representation. As 
Justice O’Connor put it, such claims are based on “a conviction that the greater the departure 
from proportionality, the more suspect an apportionment plan becomes.” “Our cases, however, 
clearly foreclose any claim that the Constitution requires proportional representation or that 
legislatures in reapportioning must draw district lines to come as near as possible to allocating 
seats to the contending parties in proportion to what their anticipated statewide vote will be.” 
 
The Founders certainly did not think proportional representation was required. For more than 50 
years after ratification of the Constitution, many States elected their congressional 
representatives through at-large or “general ticket” elections. Such States typically sent single-
party delegations to Congress. That meant that a party could garner nearly half of the vote 
statewide and wind up without any seats in the congressional delegation. The Whigs in Alabama 
suffered that fate in 1840: “their party garnered 43 percent of the statewide vote, yet did not 
receive a single seat.” When Congress required single-member districts in the Apportionment 
Act of 1842, it was not out of a general sense of fairness, but instead a (mis)calculation by the 
Whigs that such a change would improve their electoral prospects. 
 
Unable to claim that the Constitution requires proportional representation outright, plaintiffs 
inevitably ask the courts to make their own political judgment about how much representation 
particular political parties deserve—based on the votes of their supporters—and to rearrange the 
challenged districts to achieve that end. But federal courts are not equipped to apportion political 
power as a matter of fairness, nor is there any basis for concluding that they were authorized to 
do so. 
 
The initial difficulty in settling on a “clear, manageable and politically neutral” test for fairness is 
that it is not even clear what fairness looks like in this context. There is a large measure of 
“unfairness” in any winner-take-all system. Fairness may mean a greater number of competitive 
districts. Such a claim seeks to undo packing and cracking so that supporters of the 
disadvantaged party have a better shot at electing their preferred candidates. But making as many 
districts as possible more competitive could be a recipe for disaster for the disadvantaged party. 
As Justice White has pointed out, “[i]f all or most of the districts are competitive . . . even a 
narrow statewide preference for either party would produce an overwhelming majority for the 
winning party in the state legislature.” 
 
On the other hand, perhaps the ultimate objective of a “fairer” share of seats in the congressional 
delegation is most readily achieved by yielding to the gravitational pull of proportionality and 
engaging in cracking and packing, to ensure each party its “appropriate” share of “safe” seats. 
Such an approach, however, comes at the expense of competitive districts and of individuals in 
districts allocated to the opposing party. 
 
Or perhaps fairness should be measured by adherence to “traditional” districting criteria, such as 
maintaining political subdivisions, keeping communities of interest together, and protecting 
incumbents. But protecting incumbents, for example, enshrines a particular partisan distribution. 
And the “natural political geography” of a State—such as the fact that urban electoral districts 
are often dominated by one political party—can itself lead to inherently packed districts. As 
Justice Kennedy has explained, traditional criteria such as compactness and contiguity “cannot 

5 
 
promise political neutrality when used as the basis for relief. Instead, it seems, a decision under 
these standards would unavoidably have significant political effect, whether intended or not.” 
 
Deciding among just these different visions of fairness (you can imagine many others) poses 
basic questions that are political, not legal. There are no legal standards discernible in the 
Constitution for making such judgments, let alone limited and precise standards that are clear, 
manageable, and politically neutral. Any judicial decision on what is “fair” in this context would 
be an “unmoored determination” of the sort characteristic of a political question beyond the 
competence of the federal courts. 
 
And it is only after determining how to define fairness that you can even begin to answer the 
determinative question: “How much is too much?” At what point does permissible partisanship 
become unconstitutional? If compliance with traditional districting criteria is the fairness 
touchstone, for example, how much deviation from those criteria is constitutionally acceptable 
and how should mapdrawers prioritize competing criteria? Should a court “reverse gerrymander” 
other parts of a State to counteract “natural” gerrymandering caused, for example, by the urban 
concentration of one party? If a districting plan protected half of the incumbents but redistricted 
the rest into head to head races, would that be constitutional? A court would have to rank the 
relative importance of those traditional criteria and weigh how much deviation from each to 
allow. 
 
If a court instead focused on the respective number of seats in the legislature, it would have to 
decide the ideal number of seats for each party and determine at what point deviation from that 
balance went too far. If a 5-3 allocation corresponds most closely to statewide vote totals, is a 6-
2 allocation permissible, given that legislatures have the authority to engage in a certain degree 
of partisan gerrymandering? Which seats should be packed and which cracked? Or if the goal is 
as many competitive districts as possible, how close does the split need to be for the district to be 
considered competitive? Presumably not all districts could qualify, so how to choose? Even 
assuming the court knew which version of fairness to be looking for, there are no discernible and 
manageable standards for deciding whether there has been a violation. The questions are 
“unguided and ill suited to the development of judicial standards,” and “results from one 
gerrymandering case to the next would likely be disparate and inconsistent.” 
 
Appellees contend that if we can adjudicate one-person, one-vote claims, we can also assess 
partisan gerrymandering claims. But the one-person, one-vote rule is relatively easy to 
administer as a matter of math. The same cannot be said of partisan gerrymandering claims, 
because the Constitution supplies no objective measure for assessing whether a districting map 
treats a political party fairly. It hardly follows from the principle that each person must have an 
equal say in the election of representatives that a person is entitled to have his political party 
achieve representation in some way commensurate to its share of statewide support. 
 
More fundamentally, “vote dilution” in the one-person, one-vote cases refers to the idea that each 
vote must carry equal weight. In other words, each representative must be accountable to 
(approximately) the same number of constituents. That requirement does not extend to political 
parties. It does not mean that each party must be influential in proportion to its number of 
supporters. 

6 
 
 
Nor do our racial gerrymandering cases provide an appropriate standard for assessing partisan 
gerrymandering. “[N]othing in our case law compels the conclusion that racial and political 
gerrymanders are subject to precisely the same constitutional scrutiny. In fact, our country’s long 
and persistent history of racial discrimination in voting—as well as our Fourteenth Amendment 
jurisprudence, which always has reserved the strictest scrutiny for discrimination on the basis of 
race—would seem to compel the opposite conclusion.” Unlike partisan gerrymandering claims, a 
racial gerrymandering claim does not ask for a fair share of political power and influence, with 
all the justiciability conundrums that entails. It asks instead for the elimination of a racial 
classification. A partisan gerrymandering claim cannot ask for the elimination of partisanship. 
 
IV 
 
Appellees and the dissent propose a number of “tests” for evaluating partisan gerrymandering 
claims, but none meets the need for a limited and precise standard that is judicially discernible 
and manageable. And none provides a solid grounding for judges to take the extraordinary step 
of reallocating power and influence between political parties. 
 
Even the most sophisticated districting maps cannot reliably account for some of the reasons 
voters prefer one candidate over another, or why their preferences may change. Voters elect 
individual candidates in individual districts, and their selections depend on the issues that matter 
to them, the quality of the candidates, the tone of the candidates’ campaigns, the performance of 
an incumbent, national events or local issues that drive voter turnout, and other considerations. 
Many voters split their tickets. Others never register with a political party, and vote for 
candidates from both major parties at different points during their lifetimes. For all of those 
reasons, asking judges to predict how a particular districting map will perform in future elections 
risks basing constitutional holdings on unstable ground outside judicial expertise. 
 
The District Courts also found partisan gerrymandering claims justiciable under the First 
Amendment, coalescing around a basic three-part test: proof of intent to burden individuals 
based on their voting history or party affiliation; an actual burden on political speech or 
associational rights; and a causal link between the invidious intent and actual burden. 
 
To begin, there are no restrictions on speech, association, or any other First Amendment 
activities in the districting plans at issue. The plaintiffs are free to engage in those activities no 
matter what the effect of a plan may be on their district. The plaintiffs’ argument is that 
partisanship in districting should be regarded as simple discrimination against supporters of the 
opposing party on the basis of political viewpoint. Under that theory, any level of partisanship in 
districting would constitute an infringement of their First Amendment rights. But as the Court 
has explained, “[i]t would be idle . . . to contend that any political consideration taken into 
account in fashioning a reapportionment plan is sufficient to invalidate it.” The First Amendment 
test simply describes the act of districting for partisan advantage. It provides no standard for 
determining when partisan activity goes too far. 
 
The dissent proposes using a State’s own districting criteria as a neutral baseline from which to 
measure how extreme a partisan gerrymander is. The dissent would have us line up all the 

7 
 
possible maps drawn using those criteria according to the partisan distribution they would 
produce. Distance from the “median” map would indicate whether a particular districting plan 
harms supporters of one party to an unconstitutional extent. 
 
As an initial matter, it does not make sense to use criteria that will vary from State to State and 
year to year as the baseline for determining whether a gerrymander violates the Federal 
Constitution. The degree of partisan advantage that the Constitution tolerates should not turn on 
criteria offered by the gerrymanderers themselves. It is easy to imagine how different criteria 
could move the median map toward different partisan distributions. As a result, the same map 
could be constitutional or not depending solely on what the mapmakers said they set out to do. 
That possibility illustrates that the dissent’s proposed constitutional test is indeterminate and 
arbitrary. 
 
Even if we were to accept the dissent’s proposed baseline, it would return us to “the original 
unanswerable question (How much political motivation and effect is too much?).” Would twenty 
percent away from the median map be okay? Forty percent? Sixty percent? Why or why not? 
(We appreciate that the dissent finds all the unanswerable questions annoying, but it seems a 
useful way to make the point.) The dissent’s answer says it all: “This much is too much.” That is 
not even trying to articulate a standard or rule. 
 
The dissent argues that there are other instances in law where matters of degree are left to the 
courts. True enough. But those instances typically involve constitutional or statutory provisions 
or common law confining and guiding the exercise of judicial discretion. 
 
The District Court asserted that partisan gerrymanders violate “the core principle of [our] 
republican government” preserved in Art. I, §2, “namely, that the voters should choose their 
representatives, not the other way around.” That seems like an objection more properly grounded 
in the Guarantee Clause of Article IV, §4, which “guarantee[s] to every State in [the] Union a 
Republican Form of Government.” This Court has several times concluded, however, that the 
Guarantee Clause does not provide the basis for a justiciable claim. 
 
V 
 
Excessive partisanship in districting leads to results that reasonably seem unjust. But the fact that 
such gerrymandering is “incompatible with democratic principles,” does not mean that the 
solution lies with the federal judiciary. We conclude that partisan gerrymandering claims present 
political questions beyond the reach of the federal courts. Federal judges have no license to 
reallocate political power between the two major political parties, with no plausible grant of 
authority in the Constitution, and no legal standards to limit and direct their decisions. “[J]udicial 
action must be governed by standard, by rule,” and must be “principled, rational, and based upon 
reasoned distinctions” found in the Constitution or laws. Judicial review of partisan 
gerrymandering does not meet those basic requirements. 
 
What the appellees and dissent seek is an unprecedented expansion of judicial power. We have 
never struck down a partisan gerrymander as unconstitutional—despite various requests over the 
past 45 years. The expansion of judicial authority would not be into just any area of controversy, 

8 
 
but into one of the most intensely partisan aspects of American political life. That intervention 
would be unlimited in scope and duration—it would recur over and over again around the 
country with each new round of districting, for state as well as federal representatives. 
Consideration of the impact of today’s ruling on democratic principles cannot ignore the effect of 
the unelected and politically unaccountable branch of the Federal Government assuming such an 
extraordinary and unprecedented role. 
 
Our conclusion does not condone excessive partisan gerrymandering. Nor does our conclusion 
condemn complaints about districting to echo into a void. The States, for example, are actively 
addressing the issue on a number of fronts. In 2015, the Supreme Court of Florida struck down 
that State’s congressional districting plan as a violation of the Fair Districts Amendment to the 
Florida Constitution. The dissent wonders why we can’t do the same. The answer is that there is 
no “Fair Districts Amendment” to the Federal Constitution. Provisions in state statutes and state 
constitutions can provide standards and guidance for state courts to apply. Indeed, numerous 
other States are restricting partisan considerations in districting through legislation. One way 
they are doing so is by placing power to draw electoral districts in the hands of independent 
commissions. Other States have mandated at least some of the traditional districting criteria for 
their mapmakers. Some have outright prohibited partisan favoritism in redistricting. 
 
As noted, the Framers gave Congress the power to do something about partisan gerrymandering 
in the Elections Clause. The first bill introduced in the 116th Congress would require States to 
create 15-member independent commissions to draw congressional districts and would establish 
certain redistricting criteria, including protection for communities of interest, and ban partisan 
gerrymandering. Another example is the Fairness and Independence in Redistricting Act, which 
was introduced in 2005 and has been reintroduced in every Congress since. We express no view 
on any of these pending proposals. We simply note that the avenue for reform established by the 
Framers, and used by Congress in the past, remains open. 
 
No one can accuse this Court of having a crabbed view of the reach of its competence. But we 
have no commission to allocate political power and influence in the absence of a constitutional 
directive or legal standards to guide us in the exercise of such authority. “It is emphatically the 
province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.” In this rare circumstance, 
that means our duty is to say “this is not law.” 
 
Justice Kagan, with whom Justice Ginsburg, Justice Breyer, and Justice Sotomayor join, 
dissenting. 
 
For the first time ever, this Court refuses to remedy a constitutional violation because it thinks 
the task beyond judicial capabilities. And not just any constitutional violation. The partisan 
gerrymanders in these cases deprived citizens of the most fundamental of their constitutional 
rights: the rights to participate equally in the political process, to join with others to advance 
political beliefs, and to choose their political representatives. In so doing, the partisan 
gerrymanders here debased and dishonored our democracy, turning upside-down the core 
American idea that all governmental power derives from the people. These gerrymanders 
enabled politicians to entrench themselves in office as against voters’ preferences. They 
promoted partisanship above respect for the popular will. They encouraged a politics of 

9 
 
polarization and dysfunction. If left unchecked, gerrymanders like the ones here may irreparably 
damage our system of government. 
 
And checking them is not beyond the courts. The majority’s abdication comes just when courts 
across the country, including those below, have coalesced around manageable judicial standards 
to resolve partisan gerrymandering claims. Those standards satisfy the majority’s own 
benchmarks. They do not require—indeed, they do not permit—courts to rely on their own ideas 
of electoral fairness, whether proportional representation or any other. And they limit courts to 
correcting only egregious gerrymanders, so judges do not become omnipresent players in the 
political process. But yes, the standards used here do allow—as well they should—judicial 
intervention in the worst-of-the-worst cases of democratic subversion, causing blatant 
constitutional harms. In other words, they allow courts to undo partisan gerrymanders of the kind 
we face today from North Carolina and Maryland. In giving such gerrymanders a pass from 
judicial review, the majority goes tragically wrong. 
 
I 
 
A 
 
Maybe the majority errs in these cases because it pays so little attention to the constitutional 
harms at their core. After dutifully reciting each case’s facts, the majority leaves them forever 
behind, instead immersing itself in everything that could conceivably go amiss if courts became 
involved. So it is necessary to fill in the gaps. To recount exactly what politicians in North 
Carolina and Maryland did to entrench their parties in political office, whatever the electorate 
might think. And to elaborate on the constitutional injury those politicians wreaked, to our 
democratic system and to individuals’ rights. All that will help in considering whether courts 
confronting partisan gerrymandering claims are really so hamstrung—so unable to carry out their 
constitutional duties—as the majority thinks. 
 
The plaintiffs here challenge two congressional districting plans—one adopted by Republicans in 
North Carolina and the other by Democrats in Maryland—as unconstitutional partisan 
gerrymanders. As I relate what happened in those two States, ask yourself: Is this how American 
democracy is supposed to work? 
 
Start with North Carolina. After the 2010 census, the North Carolina General Assembly, with 
Republican majorities in both its House and its Senate, enacted a new congressional districting 
plan. That plan governed the two next national elections. In 2012, Republican candidates won 9 
of the State’s 13 seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, although they received only 49% of 
the statewide vote. In 2014, Republican candidates increased their total to 10 of the 13 seats, this 
time based on 55% of the vote. 
 
You might think that judgment best left to the American people. In 2016, Republican 
congressional candidates won 10 of North Carolina’s 13 seats, with 53% of the statewide vote. 
Two years later, Republican candidates won 9 of 12 seats though they received only 50% of the 
vote. (The 13th seat has not yet been filled because fraud tainted the initial election.) 
 

10 
 
Events in Maryland make for a similarly grisly tale. For 50 years, Maryland’s 8-person 
congressional delegation typically consisted of 2 or 3 Republicans and 5 or 6 Democrats. 
Maryland’s Democrats proved no less successful than North Carolina’s Republicans in devising 
a voter-proof map. In the four elections that followed (from 2012 through 2018), Democrats have 
never received more than 65% of the statewide congressional vote. Yet in each of those 
elections, Democrats have won (you guessed it) 7 of 8 House seats—including the once-reliably-
Republican Sixth District. 
 
B 
 
Now back to the question I asked before: Is that how American democracy is supposed to work? 
I have yet to meet the person who thinks so. “Governments,” the Declaration of Independence 
states, “deriv[e] their just Powers from the Consent of the Governed.” The Constitution begins: 
“We the People of the United States.” The Gettysburg Address (almost) ends: “[G]overnment of 
the people, by the people, for the people.” If there is a single idea that made our Nation (and that 
our Nation commended to the world), it is this one: The people are sovereign. The “power,” 
James Madison wrote, “is in the people over the Government, and not in the Government over 
the people.” 
 
Free and fair and periodic elections are the key to that vision. The people get to choose their 
representatives. And then they get to decide, at regular intervals, whether to keep them. Madison 
again: “[R]epublican liberty” demands “not only, that all power should be derived from the 
people; but that those entrusted with it should be kept in dependence on the people.” Election 
day—next year, and two years later, and two years after that—is what links the people to their 
representatives, and gives the people their sovereign power. That day is the foundation of 
democratic governance. 
 
And partisan gerrymandering can make it meaningless. At its most extreme—as in North 
Carolina and Maryland—the practice amounts to “rigging elections.” By drawing districts to 
maximize the power of some voters and minimize the power of others, a party in office at the 
right time can entrench itself there for a decade or more, no matter what the voters would prefer. 
Just ask the people of North Carolina and Maryland. The “core principle of republican 
government,” this Court has recognized, is “that the voters should choose their representatives, 
not the other way around.” Partisan gerrymandering turns it the other way around. By that 
mechanism, politicians can cherry-pick voters to ensure their reelection. And the power 
becomes, as Madison put it, “in the Government over the people.” 
 
The majority disputes none of this. I think it important to underscore that fact: The majority 
disputes none of what I have said (or will say) about how gerrymanders undermine democracy. 
Indeed, the majority concedes (really, how could it not?) that gerrymandering is “incompatible 
with democratic principles.” 
 
And therefore what? That recognition would seem to demand a response. The majority offers 
two ideas that might qualify as such. One is that the political process can deal with the 
problem—a proposition so dubious on its face that I feel secure in delaying my answer for some 
time. The other is that political gerrymanders have always been with us. To its credit, the 

11 
 
majority does not frame that point as an originalist constitutional argument. After all (as the 
majority rightly notes), racial and residential gerrymanders were also once with us, but the Court 
has done something about that fact. The majority’s idea instead seems to be that if we have lived 
with partisan gerrymanders so long, we will survive. 
 
That complacency has no cause. Yes, partisan gerrymandering goes back to the Republic’s 
earliest days. (As does vociferous opposition to it.) But big data and modern technology—of just 
the kind that the mapmakers in North Carolina and Maryland used—make today’s 
gerrymandering altogether different from the crude linedrawing of the past. Old-time efforts, 
based on little more than guesses, sometimes led to so-called dummymanders—gerrymanders 
that went spectacularly wrong. Not likely in today’s world. Mapmakers now have access to more 
granular data about party preference and voting behavior than ever before. County-level voting 
data has given way to precinct-level or city-block-level data; and increasingly, mapmakers avail 
themselves of data sets providing wide-ranging information about even individual voters. Just as 
important, advancements in computing technology have enabled mapmakers to put that 
information to use with unprecedented efficiency and precision. While bygone mapmakers may 
have drafted three or four alternative districting plans, today’s mapmakers can generate 
thousands of possibilities at the touch of a key—and then choose the one giving their party 
maximum advantage (usually while still meeting traditional districting requirements). The effect 
is to make gerrymanders far more effective and durable than before, insulating politicians against 
all but the most titanic shifts in the political tides. These are not your grandfather’s—let alone the 
Framers’—gerrymanders. 
 
C 
 
Partisan gerrymandering of the kind before us not only subverts democracy (as if that weren’t 
bad enough). It violates individuals’ constitutional rights as well. That statement is not the 
lonesome cry of a dissenting Justice. This Court has recognized extreme partisan gerrymandering 
as such a violation for many years. 
 
Partisan gerrymandering operates through vote dilution—the devaluation of one citizen’s vote as 
compared to others. A mapmaker draws district lines to “pack” and “crack” voters likely to 
support the disfavored party. He packs supermajorities of those voters into a relatively few 
districts, in numbers far greater than needed for their preferred candidates to prevail. Then he 
cracks the rest across many more districts, spreading them so thin that their candidates will not 
be able to win. Whether the person is packed or cracked, his vote carries less weight—has less 
consequence—than it would under a neutrally drawn (non-partisan) map. In short, the mapmaker 
has made some votes count for less, because they are likely to go for the other party. 
 
That practice implicates the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause. The Fourteenth 
Amendment, we long ago recognized, “guarantees the opportunity for equal participation by all 
voters in the election” of legislators. And that opportunity “can be denied by a debasement or 
dilution of the weight of a citizen’s vote just as effectively as by wholly prohibiting the free 
exercise of the franchise.” Based on that principle, this Court in its one-person-one-vote 
decisions prohibited creating districts with significantly different populations. A State could not, 
we explained, thus “dilut[e] the weight of votes because of place of residence.” The 

12 
 
constitutional injury in a partisan gerrymandering case is much the same, except that the dilution 
is based on party affiliation. In such a case, too, the districters have set out to reduce the weight 
of certain citizens’ votes, and thereby deprive them of their capacity to “full[y] and effective[ly] 
participat[e] in the political process[ ].” 
 
And partisan gerrymandering implicates the First Amendment too. That Amendment gives its 
greatest protection to political beliefs, speech, and association. Yet partisan gerrymanders subject 
certain voters to “disfavored treatment”—again, counting their votes for less—precisely because 
of “their voting history [and] their expression of political views.” And added to that strictly 
personal harm is an associational one. Representative democracy is “unimaginable without the 
ability of citizens to band together in [support of] candidates who espouse their political views.” 
By diluting the votes of certain citizens, the State frustrates their efforts to translate those 
affiliations into political effectiveness. 
 
Though different Justices have described the constitutional harm in diverse ways, nearly all have 
agreed on this much: Extreme partisan gerrymandering (as happened in North Carolina and 
Maryland) violates the Constitution. 
 
II 
 
So the only way to understand the majority’s opinion is as follows: In the face of grievous harm 
to democratic governance and flagrant infringements on individuals’ rights—in the face of 
escalating partisan manipulation whose compatibility with this Nation’s values and law no one 
defends—the majority declines to provide any remedy. For the first time in this Nation’s history, 
the majority declares that it can do nothing about an acknowledged constitutional violation 
because it has searched high and low and cannot find a workable legal standard to apply. 
 
The majority gives two reasons for thinking that the adjudication of partisan gerrymandering 
claims is beyond judicial capabilities. First and foremost, the majority says, it cannot find a 
neutral baseline—one not based on contestable notions of political fairness—from which to 
measure injury. According to the majority, “[p]artisan gerrymandering claims invariably sound 
in a desire for proportional representation.” But the Constitution does not mandate proportional 
representation. So, the majority contends, resolving those claims “inevitably” would require 
courts to decide what is “fair” in the context of districting. They would have “to make their own 
political judgment about how much representation particular political parties deserve” and “to 
rearrange the challenged districts to achieve that end.” And second, the majority argues that even 
after establishing a baseline, a court would have no way to answer “the determinative question: 
‘How much is too much?’” No “discernible and manageable” standard is available, the majority 
claims—and so courts could willy-nilly become embroiled in fixing every districting plan. 
 
I’ll give the majority this one—and important—thing: It identifies some dangers everyone should 
want to avoid. Judges should not be apportioning political power based on their own vision of 
electoral fairness, whether proportional representation or any other. And judges should not be 
striking down maps left, right, and center, on the view that every smidgen of politics is a 
smidgen too much. Respect for state legislative processes—and restraint in the exercise of 
judicial authority—counsels intervention in only egregious cases. 

13 
 
 
But in throwing up its hands, the majority misses something under its nose: What it says can’t be 
done has been done. Over the past several years, federal courts across the country—including, 
but not exclusively, in the decisions below—have largely converged on a standard for 
adjudicating partisan gerrymandering claims (striking down both Democratic and Republican 
districting plans in the process). And that standard does what the majority says is impossible. 
The standard does not use any judge-made conception of electoral fairness—either proportional 
representation or any other; instead, it takes as its baseline a State’s own criteria of fairness, apart 
from partisan gain. And by requiring plaintiffs to make difficult showings relating to both 
purpose and effects, the standard invalidates the most extreme, but only the most extreme, 
partisan gerrymanders. 
 
Start with the standard the lower courts used. Both courts focused on the harm of vote dilution. 
And both courts (like others around the country) used basically the same three-part test to decide 
whether the plaintiffs had made out a vote dilution claim. As many legal standards do, that test 
has three parts: (1) intent; (2) effects; and (3) causation. First, the plaintiffs challenging a 
districting plan must prove that state officials’ “predominant purpose” in drawing a district’s 
lines was to “entrench [their party] in power” by diluting the votes of citizens favoring its rival. 
Second, the plaintiffs must establish that the lines drawn in fact have the intended effect by 
“substantially” diluting their votes. And third, if the plaintiffs make those showings, the State 
must come up with a legitimate, non-partisan justification to save its map. If you are a lawyer, 
you know that this test looks utterly ordinary. It is the sort of thing courts work with every day. 
 
The majority’s broadest claim, as I’ve noted, is that this is a price we must pay because judicial 
oversight of partisan gerrymandering cannot be “politically neutral” or “manageable.” 
 
Consider neutrality first. Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, the District Courts did not have 
to—and in fact did not—choose among competing visions of electoral fairness. That is because 
they did not try to compare the State’s actual map to an “ideally fair” one (whether based on 
proportional representation or some other criterion). Instead, they looked at the difference 
between what the State did and what the State would have done if politicians hadn’t been intent 
on partisan gain. 
 
The majority’s “how much is too much” critique fares no better than its neutrality argument. 
How about the following for a first-cut answer: This much is too much. By any measure, a map 
that produces a greater partisan skew than any of 3,000 randomly generated maps (all with the 
State’s political geography and districting criteria built in) reflects “too much” partisanship. 
Think about what I just said: The absolute worst of 3,001 possible maps. The only one that could 
produce a 10-3 partisan split even as Republicans got a bare majority of the statewide vote. And 
again: How much is too much? This much is too much: A map that without any evident non-
partisan districting reason (to the contrary) shifted the composition of a district from 47% 
Republicans and 36% Democrats to 33% Republicans and 42% Democrats. A map that in 2011 
was responsible for the largest partisan swing of a congressional district in the country. Even the 
majority acknowledges that “[t]hese cases involve blatant examples of partisanship driving 
districting decisions.” If the majority had done nothing else, it could have set the line here. How 
much is too much? At the least, any gerrymanders as bad as these. 

14 
 
 
And if the majority thought that approach too case-specific, it could have used the lower courts’ 
general standard—focusing on “predominant” purpose and “substantial” effects—without fear of 
indeterminacy. I do not take even the majority to claim that courts are incapable of investigating 
whether legislators mainly intended to seek partisan advantage. 
 
III 
 
This Court has long understood that it has a special responsibility to remedy violations of 
constitutional rights resulting from politicians’ districting decisions. Over 50 years ago, we 
committed to providing judicial review in that sphere, recognizing as we established the one-
person-one-vote rule that “our oath and our office require no less.” Of course, our oath and our 
office require us to vindicate all constitutional rights. But the need for judicial review is at its 
most urgent in cases like these. “For here, politicians’ incentives conflict with voters’ interests, 
leaving citizens without any political remedy for their constitutional harms.” Those harms arise 
because politicians want to stay in office. No one can look to them for effective relief. 
 
The majority disagrees, concluding its opinion with a paean to congressional bills limiting 
partisan gerrymanders. “Dozens of [those] bills have been introduced,” the majority says. One 
was “introduced in 2005 and has been reintroduced in every Congress since.” And might be 
reintroduced until the end of time. Because what all these bills have in common is that they are 
not laws. The politicians who benefit from partisan gerrymandering are unlikely to change 
partisan gerrymandering. And because those politicians maintain themselves in office through 
partisan gerrymandering, the chances for legislative reform are slight. 
 
No worries, the majority says; it has another idea. The majority notes that voters themselves have 
recently approved ballot initiatives to put power over districting in the hands of independent 
commissions or other non-partisan actors. Fewer than half the States offer voters an opportunity 
to put initiatives to direct vote; in all the rest (including North Carolina and Maryland), voters are 
dependent on legislators to make electoral changes (which for all the reasons already given, they 
are unlikely to do). And even when voters have a mechanism they can work themselves, 
legislators often fight their efforts tooth and nail. 
 
The majority’s most perplexing “solution” is to look to state courts. But what do those courts 
know that this Court does not? If they can develop and apply neutral and manageable standards 
to identify unconstitutional gerrymanders, why couldn’t we? 
 
We could have, and we should have. The gerrymanders here—and they are typical of many—
violated the constitutional rights of many hundreds of thousands of American citizens. Those 
voters (Republicans in the one case, Democrats in the other) did not have an equal opportunity to 
participate in the political process. Their votes counted for far less than they should have because 
of their partisan affiliation. When faced with such constitutional wrongs, courts must intervene: 
“It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.” 
 
Of all times to abandon the Court’s duty to declare the law, this was not the one. The practices 
challenged in these cases imperil our system of government. Part of the Court’s role in that 

15 
 
system is to defend its foundations. None is more important than free and fair elections. With 
respect but deep sadness, I dissent. 
 