i 
 
SUPPLEMENT ON LEGISLATION 
AND LEGISLATIVE PROCESS 
FOR 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW 
THE AMERICAN PUBLIC 
LAW SYSTEM 
CASES AND MATERIALS 
Seventh Edition 
■   ■   ■ 
by 
Jerry L. Mashaw 
Sterling Professor of Law 
Yale University 
Richard A. Merrill 
Daniel Caplin Professor Emeritus 
University of Virginia 
Peter M. Shane 
Jacob E. Davis and Jacob E. Davis II Chair in Law 
The Ohio State University 
Moritz College of Law 
M. Elizabeth Magill 
Richard E. Lang Professor of Law and Dean 
Stanford Law School 
Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar 
Stanley Morrison Professor of Law  
Stanford Law School 
Nicholas R. Parrillo 
Professor of Law 
Yale Law School 
 
© 2014.  Jerry L. Mashaw, Richard A. Merrill, Peter M. Shane, M. Elizabeth Magill, Mariano -
Florentino Cuéllar, and Nicholas R. Parrillo.  All Rights Reserved.   

ii 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
A.  INTRODUCTION TO HOW STATUTES ARE MADE…………………..1 
1. The Nature of Congressional Procedure………………………………………………..1 
2. Committee Proceedings in the House and Senate…………………………………….3 
3. Floor Proceedings in the House…………………………………………………………14 
4. Floor Proceedings in the Senate…………………………………………………………19 
5. Reconciling House and Senate Difference……………………………………………..26 
6. Congressional Procedures in Litigation………………………………………………..28 
7. A Word on Drafting Statutory Text…………………………………………………….28 
B. INTRODUCTION TO STATUTORY INTERPRETATION……………31 
1. Why Reading Statutes is Hard………………………………………………………..…31 
2. Theories of Interpretation………………………………………………………………..32 
    a.  Legislative Intent………………………………………………………………………32 
     Rector of Holy Trinity Church v. United States ……………………………...…32 
    b.  Textualism………………………………………………………………………………38 
    c.  Dynamic Statutory Interpretation…………………………………………………..39 
3. Sources of Interpretive Evidence………………………………………………………..40 
    a.  Text……………………………………………………………………………………….40 
    b.   Extrinsic Sources……………………………………………………………………...41 
4. Canons of Interpretation………………………………………………………………….44 
5. Allocating Interpretive Authority……………………………………………………….46 
 
 
 

1 
 
SUPPLEMENT 
LEGISLATION AND LEGISLATIVE PROCESS 
■   ■   ■ 
 
A.  INTRODUCTION TO HOW STATUTES ARE MADE 
 
 To work with statutes as a lawyer, it helps to know how they are made.  Many of the 
theories and techniques of statutory interpretation are premised on assumptions about the 
legislative process, so lawyers must know something about that process in order to  weigh the 
theories and techniques and use them intelligently.  More concretely, courts and agencies 
interpreting a statute may rely upon its legislative history (the documents that Congress produces 
in deliberations), and a lawyer cannot use legislative history effectively without knowing how it 
is written.  Further, any lawyer who works with an agency will soon realize that its officials are 
influenced by Congress, so it pays to know something about how Congress operates.  
 
 The workings of Congress are complex and subject to constant change and manipulation.  
Here we give an overview, centered on conditions today, but with attention to the ways in which 
Congress has changed in recent decades, for the body in incomprehensible  unless viewed as an 
evolving organism.  Students interested in digging deeper are advised to consult WALTER J. 
OLESZEK, CONGRESSIONAL PROCEDURES AND THE POLICY PROCESS (9th ed. 2013) and BARBARA 
SINCLAIR, UNORTHODOX LAWMAKING: NEW LEGISLATIVE PROCESSES IN THE U.S. CONGRESS (4th 
ed. 2012), on which we have frequently relied throughout our discussion.   
 
 First, some basics.  For a bill to become law, it must be introduced and then enacted within 
a single two-year Congress.  If a bill is introduced in one Congress and has not become law by the 
end of that Congress, it dies  (expires).  As a practical matter, deliberations on a certain policy 
may extend from one Congress to the next, but formally, a new bill has to be introduced in each 
of those Congresses as the embodiment of that policy.  Lawyers should keep this in mind: 
Congress’s main deliberations on the policy behind a statute may have occurred not on the bill 
that formally became law, but on some similar bill from a prior Congress.   
 
 When a bill is introduced, it is given a unique label.  Thus, the bill “111 S. 281” was the 
281st bill introduced in the Senate during the 111th Congress.  The bill “111 H.R. 3590” was the 
3,590th bill introduced in the House during the 111th Congress.  (If the number of the Congress 
is evident from the context, it may be omitted.)  
 
 If a bill passes the chamber in which it was introduced, it is sent to the other chamber, 
retaining its label.  The House may pass H.R. 3590 and send it to the Senate, whereupon the 
Senate will consider H.R. 3590.  Thus, a bill labeled “H.R.” can be considered in the Senate, and 
a bill labeled “S.” can be considered in the House.   
 
 Once a single bill (with the same label and text) is passed by both chambers, it is presented 
to the President.  If he signs it, it becomes law.  If he vetoes it, it goes back to Congress for 
reconsideration and becomes law if two-thirds of each chamber agrees to override the veto.  If the 
President does nothing with the bill, then, after ten days, it becomes law, “unless the Congress 

2 
 
by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law.”  U.S. Const., Art. 
I, § 7.   
 
 We have so far spoken casually of a bill “passing” a chamber, but such passage is the 
culmination of a process within that chamber that is often complex, normally including the 
following eight steps:  
 
 • the bill is introduced by a member of the chamber (the sponsor)  
 • the bill is referred to whichever committee of the chamber has jurisdiction  
 • the committee considers the bill (possibly holding hearings and a markup)  
 • the committee reports the bill to the chamber  
 • the bill is placed on the chamber’s calendar 
 • the bill is called up for consideration on the floor of the chamber  
 • the bill is debated (and possibly amended) on the floor of the chamber  
 • the bill is passed by the chamber  
 
Note: If a bill (per the process above) passes one chamber, it is then received in the other chamber, 
which is the equivalent of its being introduced there.  It must then normally run the gauntlet of 
all the remaining steps in that other chamber.   
 
 The eight-step procedure outlined above is our focus for the remainder of this Section.  To 
understand the eight steps is (more or less) to understand how Congress works.  The first five 
steps—from introduction through placement on the calendar —come under  the heading 
“committee proceedings.”  The remaining steps—from calling up the bill to passage—come under 
the heading “floor proceedings.”   
 
1. THE NATURE OF CONGRESSIONAL PROCEDURE 
 
 Before we examine the procedural steps in each chamber, let us take a moment to ask a 
preliminary question: where do these procedures come from?  Who makes them?  The Constitution 
says little about the internal procedure and organization of each chamber.  Instead the framers 
empowered each chamber largely to decide those things for itself.  “Each House may determine 
the Rules of its Proceedings.”  Art. I, §  5, cl. 1.  “The House of Representatives shall chuse their 
Speaker and other Officers.”  Art. I, §  2, cl. 5.  And while the Constitution designates the Vice -
President of the United States as President of the Senate, he rarely in fact presides, and even 
when he does, his procedural rulings can be appealed to the full chamber.  The Constitution 
empowers the Senate to “chuse their other Officers,” including a Senator to preside whenever the 
Vice-President is absent.  Art. I, § 3, cl. 4-5.1 
 
 How does each chamber exercise its power to “determine the Rules of its Proceedings”?  
For the most part, it does so by adopting those rules in the form of simple resolutions.  A simple 
resolution is a legislative vehicle that need only be adopted by a single chamber in order to come 
into effect, and its purpose is typically to govern the internal workings of the chamber. 2  The 
 
1 There are few exceptional points on which the Constitution does prescribe internal chamber procedure, e.g., that “a Majority 
of each [chamber] shall constitute a Quorum to do Business,” Art. I, § 5, cl. 1, and that “Each House shall keep a Journal of its 
Proceedings, and from to time publish the same, excepting such Parts as may in their Judgment require Secrecy; and the Yeas 
and Nays of the Members of either House on any question shall, at the Des ire of one fifth of those Pres ent, be entered on the 
Journal,” Art. I, § 5, cl. 3.   
2 There are two other kinds of resolutions:  
• A concurrent resolution comes into effect when adopted by both the House and Senate, without presentment to the President, 
and its purpose is to govern the joint workings of the two chambers, e.g., deciding when Congress will adjourn, or setting th e 
chambers’ joint framework for considering appropriations bills (the Budget Resolution).   

3 
 
standing rules of each chamber consist of simple resolutions.  In the House, the membership 
adopts by simple resolution the whole “package” of standing rules at the start of each Congress, 
which is normally the same as the package from the previous Congress, though ther e can be 
modifications.  And of course the House can also adopt a simple resolution mid-Congress to make 
any alterations it wants.  In the Senate, the theory of the chamber as a “continuing body” means 
that the standing rules automatically carry over from one Congress to the next, but normally each 
rule can be traced to its origin in some simple resolution from a past session of the Senate, and 
all rules can be changed by simple resolution going forward.3 
 
 Though simple resolutions are the principal means by which each chamber governs itself, 
these resolutions cannot cover every eventuality.  There will inevitably be procedural questions 
not clearly disposed of by the standing rules.  When there is a gap or  ambiguity in the rules, 
members must act ad hoc.  In so doing, they invoke similar ad hoc actions from the past as 
precedent, and whatever action they take creates new precedent.  The parliamentarians —
nonpartisan procedural experts employed by the House a nd Senate —have made voluminous 
records of these precedents, available for use on future questions.4 
 
2. COMMITTEE PROCEEDINGS IN THE HOUSE AND SENATE 
 
 Before we discuss committees, we must say a word about the organization of each chamber 
more generally.  Although the members of each chamber are equal in the sense that each has a 
single vote once a bill is up for passage, the members are profoundly unequal in their capacity to 
influence whether a particular bill reaches that stage (and also whether, prior to the vote on 
passage, a particular amendment gets a vote).  In other words, members are equal in their power 
to vote “yes” or “no” on any item appearing on the chamber’s agenda, but they are unequal in their 
power to set the agenda.   
 
 The power of setting the chamber’s agenda —of deciding which bills (and amendments) 
come up for a vote on the floor —rests disproportionately with specially privileged groups of 
legislators: the party leadership and the committees.   
 
 Party Leadership.  Each chamber is divided into a majority and minority party caucus.  
Each party caucus, acting in secret at the start of each Congress, elects a small group of leaders, 
vested with a degree of directive power over how party caucus members act.  In each of the party 
 
• A joint resolution is legally no different from a statute.  To come into effect, it must be approved according to Article I, section 
7, just like a statute.  Once in effect, it has the force of law, i.e., it can govern matters beyond the internal and joint workings of 
the two chambers, including private conduct.  Whether an enactment is designated a “statute” or “joint resolution” is merely a 
matter of style.  One exception: a proposed constitutional amendment is styled a “joint resolution,” even though it only requires 
the approval of the two chambers and is not presented to the President.   
3 Not all standing rules of a chamber derive from simple resolutions.  There are several statutes that, on the surface, appear to 
bind the House and Senate to follow certain internal procedures.  For example, many statutes authorize expedited consideration 
of presidentially-negotiated trade agreements in both chambers.  Such statutes present a conundrum.  Normally, a statute 
cannot be altered, except by a future statute.  If each chamber is required to follow these statutorily-prescribed rules for its own 
internal workings, then it cannot escape from those rules unless the statute is amended, that is, unless the other chamber and 
the President agree to the change.  This seems to clash with the principle of Article I, section 5, that each chamber is to have 
unilateral control of its own internal procedures.  However, most statutes prescribing internal chamber rules resolve the 
conundrum by including a disclaimer recognizing the power of each chamber to depart from the statutorily-prescribed rules by 
simple resolution.  Not every such statute contains this kind of disclaimer.  But even so, it has been the overwhelming pattern 
for the House and Sen ate to treat statutorily -prescribed rules, even without disclaimers, as subject to override by simple 
resolution.  Aaron-Andrew P. Bruhl, Using Statutes to Set Legislative Rules, 19 J. LAW & POLITICS 345 (2003).   
4 FLOYD M. RIDDICK & ALAN S. FRUMIN, RIDDICK’S SENATE PROCEDURE: PRECEDENTS AND PRACTICES (rev. ed. 1992) (1,608 pages, 
covering early republic to 1990); DESCHLER-BROWN-JOHNSON-SULLIVAN PRECEDENTS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES (18 
volumes, published 1977- 2013 and covering 1936- 2012); CANNON’S PRECEDENTS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES (6 
volumes, published 1935- 41 and covering 1907- 1935); HINDS’ PRECEDENTS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES (5 volumes, 
published 1907 and covering 1789-1907).   

4 
 
caucuses, the leaders number four or five, with the top two designated Majority (or Minority) 
Leader and Majority (or Minority) Whip, except in the House majority party caucus, where the 
Speaker is above the Majority Leader.   
 
 Committees—Their Powers.  The House and Senate are organized into standing (i.e., 
permanent) committees, listed below.  Note that a committee of one chamber sometimes has a 
perfect or close counterpart in the other chamber (e.g., Appropriations, Budget, Judiciary), but 
often not.  Each committee generally has the same proportion of majority-party members as the 
chamber at large and is chaired by a member of the majority party.   
 
Senate Standing Committees 
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry  
Appropriations  
Armed Services  
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs  
Budget  
Commerce, Science, and Transportation  
Energy and Natural Resources  
Environment and Public Works  
Finance  
Foreign Relations  
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions  
Homeland Security and Governmental 
Affairs  
Judiciary  
Rules and Administration  
Small Business and Entrepreneurship 
Veterans’ Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
House Standing Committees 
Agriculture 
Appropriations 
Armed Services 
Budget 
Education and the Workforce 
Energy and Commerce 
Ethics 
Financial Services 
Foreign Affairs 
Homeland Security 
House Administration 
Judiciary 
Natural Resources 
Oversight and Government Reform 
Rules 
Science, Space, and Technology 
Small Business 
Transportation and Infrastructure 
Veterans’ Affairs 
Ways and Means 
 
 Each committee has jurisdiction over a set of topics, which is defined, in the first instance, 
by the standing rules of the chamber.  If a bill is introduced on a topic, it is supposed to be referred 
to the committee covering that topic.  The committee then decides whether to report  the bill to 
the chamber.  Historically, the norm has been that (1) every bill that is introduced is referred to 
a committee and (2)  no bill can be considered on the floor unless that committee reports it.  
Another way of statin g the norm is that each committee is the gatekeeper for new legislation 
within its jurisdiction.  (There are important and growing exceptions to this norm, to be discussed 
shortly.)   
 
 In exercising their gatekeeping power, committees are highly selective.  Of all the bills 
introduced in Congress, about 85% die in committee—that is, the bill is introduced and referred 
to the committee of jurisdiction, which refrains from reporting it before the Congress ends.   
 
 Although the gatekeeping power is formally vested in the committee as a whole —the 
motion to report a bill must be adopted by a majority vote of the committee —that power 
practically resides mainly with the committee’s chairman.  This is because the chairma n 
customarily decides which bills the committee will consider.  Further, the chair controls the 
committee’s majority staff and budget, which gives him or her further influence over which 

5 
 
 
 
matters receive consideration.  It is possible for a majority of the committee to override the chair’s 
decision about whether to consider a bill, but that is rare.  RICHARD L. HALL, PARTICIPATION IN 
CONGRESS 97-98 (1996); OLESZEK, supra, at 125.   
 
 Committees—Limits on Their Powers.  Although the jurisdiction of each committee is set 
by the standing rules of its chamber in the first instance, the rules are merely short lists of general 
topics.  For example, here is the list for the House Ways and Means Committee, drawn from the 
Rules of the House of Representatives, Rule X, clause 1(t):  
 
(1) Customs revenue, collection districts, and ports of entry and delivery. 
(2) Reciprocal trade agreements. 
(3) Revenue measures generally. 
(4) Revenue measures relating to insular possessions. 
(5) Bonded debt of the United States, subject to the last sentence of clause 4(f) [of the Rules 
of the House of Representatives.  This clause requires the Ways and Means Committee to 
recommend an appropriate level of public debt to the Budget Committee each year.]  
(6) Deposit of public monies. 
(7) Transportation of dutiable goods. 
(8) Tax exempt foundations and charitable trusts. 
(9) National Social Security (except health care and facilities programs that are supported 
from general revenues as opposed to payroll deductions and except work incentive 
programs). 
 
 The lists inevitably contain ambiguities and gaps.  In such gray areas, a bill is to go to the 
committee with the “closest” jurisdiction.  Discerning the “closest” committee is subjective.  
Lawmakers make it up as they go.  As with all procedural actions,  every referral becomes 
precedent for the future.  Officially, referral decisions are made in the House by the Speaker and 
in the Senate by the presiding officer (a position normally filled by members of the majority party 
caucus on a rotating basis).  Pra ctically, these officers defer to the determinations of the 
parliamentarians, who are expert in the relevant precedents.  The enterprising legislator, in 
structuring a bill, tries to game the rules and precedents, so the bill will go to a committee she 
views as favorable (often a committee of which she herself is a member or chair).  Couching a bill 
as an amendment to a preexisting statute over which a friendly committee has jurisdiction raises 
the probability that the bill will go to that committee.  Struc turing a benefit program as a tax 
break (rather than government spending) means it will go to the House Ways and Means and 
Senate Finance Committees.  At times, legislators, staffers, and lobbyists will submit arguments 
to the parliamentarian, based on precedent and bill structure, urging a certain referral, or they 
will ask the parliamentarian to read a draft bill to find out where it is likely to be referred—and 
how it must be revised to alter the destination.  Committee jurisdictions are the evolving product 
of strategic manipulation by competing actors.  This evolution and manipulation limit the 
monopoly of gatekeeping power that a single committee holds over a particular subject.  See 
generally DAVID C. KING, TURF WARS: HOW CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES CLAIM JURISDICTION 
(1997).   
 
 In the House, the gatekeeping monopolies of committees have been further weakened by 
a 1975 rule that allowed for “multiple referral.”  This meant the Speaker could refer a bill to more 
than one committee.  The rule lowered the stakes of the referral decis ion and reduced the 

6 
 
 
 
motivation for turf battles.  And it opened up the deliberative process by allowing two or more 
committees to consider the bill and propose changes to it.  But it presented one danger: two or 
more committees now each had unilateral power to refrain from reporting the bill, thus blocking 
it from reaching the floor; this made it harder to get anything done.  To address this problem, the 
House in 1995 altered the rule to require the Speaker, in every case of multiple referral, to 
designate one of the committee s as having “primary jurisdiction,” and the Speaker can now 
impose a deadline on each non- primary committee and, if that committee fails to report by the 
deadline, discharge it (i.e., take the bill away from the committee, divesting it of power to block 
the bill).  When used in this way, multiple referral creates the opportunity for more than one 
committee to study a bill and propose changes to it (thus giving the bill the benefit of more diverse 
kinds of expertise and constituent input), but without the da nger of setting up additional veto 
points.  When multiple committees each propose their own changes to a bill, it usually falls to the 
House majority party leadership to negotiate among the different versions.  Because of this, the 
leadership has more powe r than under the old regime of one- committee monopoly.  In recent 
years, about one-third of major bills in the House have been multiply referred.  SINCLAIR, supra, 
at 12-16, 142-44.5 
 
 So far, we have focused on committee gatekeeping power vis-a-vis other committees.  What 
about committee gatekeeping power against the chamber at large?  How strong is it?  Say that a 
bill is favored by a majority of the chamber but opposed by the committee(s) to which it has been 
referred.  Is there anything the chamber majority can do?   
 
 In the Senate, there are two maneuvers by which members of the chamber can, without 
great difficulty, circumvent a committee that is blocking a bill.  Because of these maneuvers, 
bypassing committee, “while not an everyday occurrence in the Senate, is easier to accomplish in 
that chamber than in the House.”  O LESZEK, supra, at 319.  Indeed, committees in the Senate 
have been bypassed in the past decade more than ever before, on about one- third of major bills.  
SINCLAIR, supra, at 147.   
 
 The first maneuver is for a Senator to object to referral.  When a bill has been introduced 
and gone through its customary second reading, Senate Rule XIV says that any Senator can object 
to referring the bill to a committee, in which case the bill is automatically placed on the chamber’s 
calendar, eligible to be called up for consideration on the floor.  At first glance, one might think 
this technique allows any Senator to steer a bill around committee by merely uttering the words 
“I object.”  But it is not quite that easy.  The objection can only be made under certain procedural 
circumstances (too arcane to explain here) that the Senate Majority Leader can prevent from 
arising.  Thus, the maneuver requires the support of the Majority Leader.  It is therefore confined 
to situations where the Majority Leader is at odds with a committee —unusual, since all 
committees are controlled by the majority party.  The most spectacular instance occurred in 1964, 
when the liberal Democratic Majority Leader Mike Mansfield used Rule XIV to steer the House-
passed Civil Rights Act around the Senate Judiciary Committee, chaired by segregationist 
Democrat James Eastland.  
 
 A second Senate- specific maneuver to circumvent committee is the non -germane 
amendment.  While House rules require every amendment offered on the floor to be germane 
 
5 Though multiple referral is also available in the Senate, it has been much rarer, in part because there are already several 
other Senate-specific maneuvers for affecting a bill outside the traditional committee process, which we shall discuss soon. 

7 
 
 
 
(relevant) to the underlying bill, Senate rules do not.  Thus, if a Senator favors a bill that is bottled 
up in committee, she can offer that bill as an “amendment” to any other bill that happens to reach 
the Senate floor.  Senator Everett Dirksen once offered the text of a major legislative 
reapportionment measure (bottled up in the Judiciary Committee) as an amendment to a bill 
declaring National American Legion Baseball Month.  OLESZEK, supra, at 319.  To be sure, the 
offer of an amendment in the Senate (like passage of a bill in the Senate) is debatable, and Senate 
rules require 60 votes to cut off debate.  Hence, one needs a supermajority of the chamber to 
circumvent the committee.  But all this means is that the maneuver is no easier (or harder) than 
passing a bill in the Senate.  Significantly, the non-germane amendment is unlike the Rule XIV 
maneuver in that it does not require the help of the Majority Leader, so it can be decisive in a 
situation where (1)  the minority caucus, plus a dissident faction of the majority party caucus, 
forms a chamber-wide majority of 60+ votes in favor of a bill but (2) the majority party leadership 
and the majority-party-controlled committee of jurisdiction oppose the bill.   
 
 In the House, neither of these two maneuvers is available, and a House committee 
therefore has greater power to defy a chamber -wide majority (at least when the majority party 
leadership is on the committee’s side).  O LESZEK, supra, at 319.  The traditional maneuver 
available to a chamber-wide majority in the House, when facing a recalcitrant committee, is the 
discharge petition.  Any member of the House can start such a petition, and if a majority of House 
members sign it, the bill is automatically sprung from committee, and any member can move to 
call it up on the floor.  But in fact, discharge petitions rarely succeed.  Since 1931, only 47 of them 
have garnered the required number of signatures, resulting in only 19 bills p assing the House 
and only three actual statutes.  The last such petition to garner the requisite signatures was in 
2002 (on the House analogue to the McCain -Feingold campaign finance reform, which became 
law).  It is unclear why the discharge petition is not more common in the House; some think the 
mere threat of it may induce foot-dragging committees to report bills.  GARY W. COX & MATTHEW 
D. MCCUBBINS, LEGISLATIVE LEVIATHAN: PARTY GOVERNMENT IN THE HOUSE 241 (2d ed. 2007).6 
 
 Theoretically, a House majority has another means of overriding a committee, and an 
extremely potent one, though it works only if the majority party leadership is on board.  This is 
the special rule, a very important procedural device by which the majority party leadership calls 
up bills on the floor and structures floor proceedings.  (We shall discuss the special rule in detail 
below, at pages 15-18.)  Normally, bills called up by the leadership using a special rule are ones 
that have been reported from committee.  But the leadership can also use a special rule to call up 
bills that have not been so reported.  Since the 1980s, as House majority party caucuses have 
grown more cohesive and their leaders more powerful, this kind of bypass has become increasingly 
common and now happens on one-fifth to one-third of major bills.  SINCLAIR, supra, at 147.  But 
such bypasses often occur because the leadership and the relevant committee chair agree on the 
bill and want to get it to the floor quickly.  S INCLAIR, supra, at 19-21, 146.  That is, the special 
rule is often used in cooperation with the relevant committee, not as a means to defy that 
committee.  The leadership could use the special rule to defy a committee, but instances of this 
happening openly are rare.  OLESZEK, supra, at 186-87.   
 
 In the many instances when committee chairs ostensibly cooperate in this process, it may 
 
6 The discharge petition is also available in the Senate, but never used, since nongermane amendments and 
objections to referral are more convenient weapons. 

8 
 
 
 
be that, sometimes, the chairs secretly disagree with the leadership’s action but hide their feelings 
because they know the leadership cannot be stopped, and they want to conceal their own 
impotence.  If the special rule does empower the leadership to circ umvent defiant committee 
chairs, this may partly explain why discharge petitions are so rarely successful.  Accumulating 
the signatures of a majority of House members requires at least some members of the majority 
party to sign, but if the majority party i s broadly in favor of the bill, the leadership —which 
normally acts on the majority party’s predominant view—can simply use a special rule to override 
the committee.  Hence, the only situation in which members are likely to rely upon the discharge 
petition—and succeed—is when (1) the bill is opposed not only by the committee but also by most 
of the majority party and its leadership, yet (2) the minority party, plus a dissident faction of the 
majority party, form a chamber-wide majority in favor of the bill.  This is what happened in the 
case of McCain -Feingold, when the Democrats peeled off a few dissident members of the 
Republican majority to obtain the necessary signatures.  It is not surprising that these situations 
are rare, given the strong and growing p arty discipline and polarization that characterize the 
House.7   
 
 Committees—Their Motives.  Though the exact degree of committee gatekeeping power 
varies with context and is sometimes unknowable, it is hard to deny that committees have some 
substantial amount of power.  What do they use that power for?  Roughly speaking, scholars have 
adopted two different views of what motivates committees.   
 
 The first view is that committees are representative of the preferences of the majority 
party caucus, or, alternately, of the chamber at large.  Begin by imagining that, for each 
substantive issue, the majority party caucus (or chamber) has a preference, defined as the policy 
that the median member of the caucus (or chamber) considers ideal for the nation overall.  Each 
committee represents this preference in some meaningful way.  (One can posit various ways of 
operationalizing this: perhaps the entire committee is chosen so that the preference of its median 
member matches that of the median member of the chamber; or perhaps the committee’s majority-
party contingent is chosen so that the preference of that contingent’s median member matches 
the preference of the median member of the majority party caucus.)  But if committees simply 
mimic the preference of the majority party caucus (or chamber), what is their purpose?  Expertise.  
The majority party caucus (or chamber) knows its ideal value choice for a particular substantive 
issue, but it may not know enough about the preexisting law or the affected industries to 
implement that choice effectively.  For example, if the majority party caucus wants to make it so 
that all Americans have health insurance, it needs bill-designers who understand how the health 
and insurance industries are likely to behave under different possible statutory schemes.  The 
division of labor provided by the committee system allows members to specialize and acquire such 
information, which they then use to make the preference of the caucus (or chamber) into a reality.   
 
 The second view is that committees are not representative of the preferences of any larger 
legislative group (whether the majority party caucus or the chamber) but instead are “preference 
outliers.”  Committees turn out this way because statutory policies impose costs and distribute 
 
7 There is one additional way to bypass committee in the House.  As we shall discuss below (page 14), one of the techniques in 
the House for calling up a bill on the floor is suspension of the rules, which requires a two-thirds vote of the chamber.  This 
technique is commonly used to call up bills that have been reported by a committee and placed on the calendar.  But it can 
also be used to call up a bill that has not been reported by committee, thus bypassing the committee.  But such use of the 
technique is unusual.  The technique is also available in the Senate but almost never used there.   

9 
 
 
 
benefits in ways that are uneven across the states (or districts) that members individually 
represent.  Because each member has some choice as to the committees on which she serves, she 
will self-select onto committees covering policy areas that have a concentrated impact on her state 
(or district).  Imagine that 100 manufacturers, all concentrated in one small region, make a 
product that is sold to one million consumers, scattered uniformly across the nation.  A product 
safety bill is proposed that will co st each manufacturer $1,000 and provide expected benefits to 
each consumer of $1.  Thus, the total cost to industry is $100,000, while the total benefit to 
consumers is ten times greater: $1,000,000.  From the perspective of society as a whole, the bill 
is obviously a good idea, and for that reason, all legislators not representing the small 
manufacturing region (including the median member of the chamber and the median member of 
the majority party caucus) favor it.  But the lawmakers from the manufacturing region will be 
the ones motivated to self -select onto the committee with jurisdiction over the regulatory bill, 
where they will block it.  Similar stories can be told about governmental benefit or procurement 
programs.  Say that a military program is fina nced with $1 each from a million taxpayers 
scattered uniformly across the nation, but it confers $1,000 in profits on each of 100 companies, 
concentrated in one small region.  And say the program is so inefficient as to provide no benefit 
to national security.  From the perspective of society, the program ought to be terminated, and all 
legislators except the minority with companies in their districts will agree.  But those 
representing the companies will self-select onto the relevant committee and stop any bill killing 
the program.  Each lawmaker tolerates this kind of self-selection by her colleagues, so long as she 
herself can do it, too.   
 
 Which of the two views matches reality?  The results of empirical studies gauging the 
preferences of legislators on and off committees have been mixed.  Some committees are 
representative, others are outliers, and others are in between, and studies vary on how many fall 
into each category.  One of the most elaborate studies finds that, during the long era of Democratic 
control of the House (1947-92), the committees on Appropriations, Budget, and Ways and Means 
were most representative (in the sense that th eir majority -party contingents matched the 
majority party caucus, and their total membership matched the chamber), while those most likely 
to be outliers included Agriculture (pro -farm) and Armed Services and Veterans’ Affairs (pro -
military).  DAVID EPSTEIN & SHARYN O’HALLORAN, DELEGATING POWERS: A TRANSACTION COST 
POLITICS APPROACH TO POLICY MAKING UNDER SEPARATE POWERS 163-95 (1999).  Compare John 
H. Aldrich & David W. Rohde, Congressional Committees in a Continuing Partisan Era , in 
CONGRESS RECONSIDERED 226-27 (Lawrence C. Dodd & Bruce I. Oppenheimer eds., 9th ed. 2009) 
(noting that, at least through the 1990s, committees varied greatly in their levels of internal party 
conflict, with the lowest levels occurring on “constituency committees” like Agriculture, Armed 
Services, and Veterans’ Affairs).  
 
 This mixed reality is understandable.  The majority party’s need for experts that loyally 
carry out its program is real, as is the willingness of some members to commit themselves to the 
party’s program and its implementation on particular issues.  But me mbers’ tendency to self -
select onto committees that disproportionately impact their constituents is likewise real.  There 
will often be tension between these factors, though sometimes they may be synergistic.  A majority 
party caucus needs loyal experts to  implement its program, but it also needs to maintain its 
majority status, and doing that may be easier if it allows some of its members to self -select in a 
way that helps their parochial electoral prospects.  Also, a party can better maintain the loyalty 
of its members on nationwide issues if it allows them rewards pertaining to parochial issues.   

10 
 
 
 
 
 Committees—How Members and Chairs Are Selected .  To better understand committee 
motives, including how they vary with context and over time, we must consider how the members 
and chairs of committees are selected.  The first thing to note is that seats on committees are 
divvied up by party.  By custom, the proportion of seats belonging to a party normally equals its 
proportion of the chamber overall.  But how are a party’s committee seats allocated among its 
members?  In the party caucus of each chamber, there is a steering committee, normally dominated 
by the leadership, that assigns committee memberships and chairmanships at the start of each 
Congress.  Assignments must then be approved by a vote of the caucus.  Each steering committee 
professes to consider several criteria.  Some of those criteria—a member’s adherence to the party 
line, fundraising on the party’s behalf, and substantive expertise —are consistent with the view 
of committees as loyal expert agents of the majority party caucus.  But another factor considered 
by all steering committees is seniority.  The longer a member has served in the chamber, the more 
she gets her pick of committees.  The longer a member has served on a committee, the more likely 
she is to be selected as chair.  What are the implications of assigning weight to seniority?  On the 
one hand, seniority has some correlation with expertise.  On the other hand, there is no reason to 
think that seniority correlates with loyalty to the preferences of the majority party caucus or 
chamber.  The more seniority is respected, the more potential it has to entrench preference 
outliers.   
 
 The importance of seniority has varied across chambers, parties, and historical periods, 
and these differences profoundly affect the behavior of committees.  For most of the twentieth 
century, seniority in both House and Senate was the overriding criterio n for committee 
assignments and the sole criterion for selecting chairs: every committee was chaired by the 
member of the majority party who had served on the committee longest.  This could make it 
extremely difficult for the majority party caucus to pursue a coherent program.  Most famously, 
the Democratic majorities in the House and Senate were long hobbled in their effort to pursue 
civil rights legislation favored by a majority of the caucus (and passable with the help of 
Republicans), because key chairmanships were held by elderly, long-serving Southern Democrats 
who opposed such reforms.  To be sure, it is hard to distinguish cause and effect: one can argue 
that the Democratic party was profoundly split on civil rights and that liberal Democrats 
tolerated the strict seniority norm for so long because they feared that challenging the Southern 
gatekeepers would cause their party to fall to pieces.  GARY W. COX & MATTHEW D. MCCUBBINS, 
SETTING THE AGENDA: RESPONSIBLE PARTY GOVERNMENT IN THE U.S. HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES 64-65 (2005).  Ultimately, liberal Democrats in the 1960s bypassed and 
overrode the Southern Democratic chairmen and passed landmark civil rights legislation in 
league with Republicans—a move that did, in fact, disrupt the alliance between Northern liberals 
and the white South.   
 
 Partly as a result of the alliance’s demise, the Democratic and Republican parties have 
become ever more ideologically homogenous, and ever more polarized from one another, from the 
1970s to the present.  This has made “party loyalty” a more coherent conc ept than in the past—
and a more workable and attractive criterion for selecting committee members and chairmen.  
Seniority has accordingly declined in importance.   
 
 The first major step in this direction occurred in the 1970s, when the liberal majority of 
the House Democratic party caucus replaced the pure seniority rule with steering -committee 

11 
 
 
 
elections for committee chairs, which motivated several senior Democrats to move left in order to 
keep or win chairmanships.  When the Republicans took over the House in 1995 under the 
leadership of Newt Gingrich, their steering committee departed from sen iority even more 
dramatically.  Further, they imposed six -year term limits on chairmanships to prevent chairs 
from building up autonomy.  In 2005, the Republican leadership took the unprecedented step of 
ousting Rep. Christopher Smith from the chair of the  Veterans’ Affairs Committee for work ing 
against the party line.  Aldrich & Rohde, supra, at 233.  When Democrats took power in 2007, it 
appeared they might not be so anti-seniority as Republicans.  Their steering committee generally 
chose senior members for chairmanships.  O LESZEK, supra, at 124.  And in 2009 they rescinded 
the six -year term limits —though, at the same time, Rep. Henry Waxman did successfully 
challenge Rep. John Dingell for the chairmanship of the Energy and Commerce Committee.  This 
committee has jurisdiction over environmental issues, and in that area, Waxman was much closer 
to the Democratic caucus and the leadership than Dingell, whose devotion to his district’s auto 
industry made him an outlier.  When Republicans regained control in 2011, they reimposed term 
limits, construing the rule strictly to say the six -year clock had continued to run while 
Republicans were in the minority.8   
 
 In the Senate, the party caucuses have not gone as far in preferring loyalty to seniority, 
though there has been movement in that direction.  For example, Senate Republicans since 1995 
have imposed six -year limits on chairmanships.  But these are less consequential than in the 
House: the Senate’s small size means that every Senator sits on several committees, so when a 
senior Senator departs the chairmanship of one committee, he can typically become chair of 
another.   
 
 Committees—Their Proceedings and Reports.  Now that we have a sense of the nature and 
limits of committee power and the motives that drive its exercise, we can examine more concretely 
the day-to-day work that a committee does on a bill.  It should first be noted that intra-committee 
proceedings are partly governed by the standing rules of the chamber, but the gaps and 
ambiguities in those rules provide each committee and especially its chair with wide discretion to 
proceed as they see fit.  Unlike the chamber floor, committees have no parliamenta rians to 
regularize their activities.   
 
 Each committee has subcommittees, whose relationship to the committee is somewhat 
like the committee’s relationship to the chamber.  The committee can refer a bill to a 
subcommittee, which can then vote to report that bill back to the committee.  Like a committee, a 
subcommittee can hold hearings and markups and is typically dominated by its chair, who 
controls the agenda.  Bills vary in how much process occurs in the committee versus the 
subcommittee.  Some bills are handled solely in committee, with no reference to a subcommittee.  
Other bills are subject to hearings and markup in subcommittee but nothing except a rubber -
stamp report in committee.  Still others have extensive process at both levels.   
 
 One of the main things a committee (or subcommittee) can do when considering a bill is 
hold a hearing .  Witnesses commonly include (1)  officials from federal agencies, who may have 
helped design or draft the bill and who may be the ones charged with administering it should it 
 
8 To be sure, the caucus occasionally grants waivers, as it did after the November 2012 election to permit Rep. Paul Ryan to 
remain chair of the Budget Committee, but this exception proves the rule: it reflects Ryan’s prowess as the party’s ideologic al 
standard-bearer, not respect for his seniority. 

12 
 
 
 
pass; (2) representatives of stakeholders, including trade associations and advocacy groups; and 
(3) analysts from think tanks and academia.  A hearing may be truly informational and 
spontaneous, aimed at educating the members on the meaning and workings o f the bill and 
possible alternatives and airing the arguments for and against.  But a hearing may also be a 
scripted performance, aimed at broadcasting members’ entrenched views about the bill to the 
press. Over the past few generations, hearings have become, on average, less informational and 
more performative.  One reason is the rise of television.  Another reason is the rise of professional 
committee staff, which provide committee members with less -formal means of gathering 
information than hearings.  Transcripts of hearings are commonly published.   
 
 A key event during committee consideration is the markup , that is, a public meeting of 
the committee (or subcommittee) at which members propose amendments to the bill, debate them, 
and vote on them.  Amendments can be extensive and may amount to a complete rewrite of the 
bill.  Note that, when a committee votes to make an amendment to a bill, what it technically does 
is vote to include, in its report of the bill to the chamber, a recommendation that the chamber 
amend the bill in the manner specified ; a committee has no power to amend a bill unilaterally.  
That said, the committee has the option of drawing up an amended version of the bill and then 
having one of its members introduce that version as a new bill (a “clean bill”), which can then be 
referred to the committee, which can then report it, with the amendments baked into the cake.   
 
 Markups vary along several dimensions.  They can be finished in a half hour or drag on 
for weeks.  They can be run according to strict rules of parliamentary procedure (with 
amendments offered as fully -drafted texts) or in seminar fashion (with members ag reeing on a 
“concept,” to be reduced to text later by staff or Legislative Counsel).  Abbe R. Gluck & Lisa 
Schultz Bressman, Statutory Interpretation from the Inside —An Empirical Study of 
Congressional Drafting, Delegation, and the Canons: Part  I, 65 STAN. L. REV. 901, 968 (2013).  
Commonly, the markup will begin with some initial text, to which amendments are proposed.  
This initial text can be the bill as introduced.  But the chair has the power to substitute a different 
text, which is then known as the chairman’s mark.  This conversation-starting power gives the 
chair further influence.  As with hearings, markups can sometimes be tightly scripted, the actual 
decisions having been made beforehand in closed -door meetings, sometimes excluding the 
minority party members.  Historically, markups were sometimes transcribed but usually were 
not published.  More recently, transcripts have sometimes been published, or a video of the 
meeting has been posted on the committee website.  
 
 Committee proceedings culminate in the committee’s vote to report the bill to the chamber.  
To report the bill means to place it under the chamber’s control, so the chamber can take it up.  
Normally, when a committee reports a bill, it does so with a recommendation that it pass.  This 
is not required: the committee can report the bill with a negative reco mmendation, or no 
recommendation.  But that is unusual.  If a committee is against a bill, the usual route is to 
refrain from reporting it at all.   
 
 When a committee reports a bill, it sends a copy (with any recommended amendments) to 
the chamber.  It also sends a committee report, that is, a document explaining what the bill means, 
what it aims to accomplish, and why to vote for it.  Typically, this document is the most sustained 
expert discussion of the bill published at any point in the legislative process.   
 

13 
 
 
 
 The committee report has three main audiences.  The first is the members of the chamber 
(and the staff who advise them), who rely upon the report to understand the bill and the 
arguments for passing it.  Non- specialists in the area will find it easier to understand the bill’s 
meaning from the committee report than to try to read the text of the bill itself.   
 
 The second audience consists of officials at the agency that will administer the law if 
enacted.  When the text of the statute is ambiguous or otherwise furnishes agency officials with 
discretion, those officials will often look to the committee report fo r guidance on what m embers 
thought the bill meant, or what it was supposed to accomplish.  One might say that agency 
officials are relying upon the committee report as an interpretive source to help discern “what the 
law is,” but their motivation may be mo re practical than that.  As noted in Chapter 2 of the 
Casebook ( in Section D), agency officials have incentives to stay in the good graces of the 
committees with jurisdiction over them, so if the committee report reflects what those committee 
members want, that in itself may be reason enough for officials to follow it.  See generally Robert 
A. Katzmann, Madison Lecture: Statutes, 87 N.Y.U. L. REV. 637, 656-61 (2012).  
 
 The third audience is the judiciary.  As we discuss below (pages 42- 43), courts may take 
committee reports into account when interpreting statutes.  Members and their staffers, aware 
of this, may shape the report with an eye toward the courts.  But judges are the not the main 
audience for committee reports: in a recent survey of congressional staffers, slightly more cited 
agencies as an addressee of legislative history than cit ed courts.  Gluck & Bressman, supra , at 
972.   
 
 If members want a statute implemented in a certain way, why do they include such 
directives in the committee report and not the text of the bill?  One possible reason is that the 
report’s format allows lawmakers to speak in the idiom of policy and goals, whereas bill text tends 
toward the harder-edged language of commands, prohibitions, and authorizations.  This may be 
valuable if lawmakers want flexibility in implementation.  Or perhaps the reasons are more 
sinister.  The committee must vote to report the  bill itself, but it normally does not vote on the 
committee report, which is normally prepared by staff under control of the chair.  The committee 
report therefore might serve as a conduit for the chair or staff to insert directives for which the 
committee itself would not vote.  But this fear may be exaggerated.  Every member of the 
committee has the right to submit “additional views” to be published with the report.  That option 
may serve as a check on an opportunistic chair attempting to sneak something  in.  James J. 
Brudney, Below the Surface: Comparing Legislative History Usage by the House of Lords and the 
Supreme Court, 85 WASH. U. L. REV. 1, 53 (2007).  Notably, at least some committees vote to report 
the bill on the basis of a conceptual plan, with the bill’s actual text drafted later by staff or 
Legislative Counsel.  In such cases, the bill text itself is no more subject to a committee vote than 
is the committee report.  Gluck & Bressman, supra, at 968.   
 
 Placing the Bill on the Calendar.  After a committee reports a bill to the chamber, the bill 
is placed on a calendar.  A calendar is a list of bills that have been reported.  The Senate has a 
single calendar for all bills.  The House has two calendars for bills: the Union Calendar (for bills 
that raise money, spend money, or authorize spending money) and the House Calen dar (for all 
other bills).  The order of the bills on a calendar is the order in which they were reported.   
 
 The House and Senate both have default procedures providing that bills are to be 

14 
 
 
 
considered by the chamber in the order of the calendar.  In fact, these procedures are never 
followed.  The reason is that the order of the calendar does not reflect bills’ importance or political 
urgency.  Instead, each chamber has a set of techniques for  calling up bills from the calendar 
without following the order of the calendar.  Those techniques are examined in subsections 3 and 
4, immediately below.   
 
3. FLOOR PROCEEDINGS IN THE HOUSE 
 
 At any given time, the House has many bills on its calendars, varying greatly in 
importance and political urgency.  The default procedure is for the House to consider the bills in 
the order of each calendar, that is, the order in which they were reported.   In fact, the House 
never follows this procedure.  Instead it uses four other techniques for calling up and considering 
bills, all of which are sensitive to political urgency and to the House’s power structure.   
 
 Technique 1: Unanimous Consent.  Any member can ask unanimous consent to call up a 
bill and pass it.  If nobody objects, the bill is passed.  Obviously, this only works for the most 
uncontroversial bills.  A member seeking unanimous consent must be recognized by the Speaker, 
so the majority party leadership controls when members can attempt to use this technique.   
 
 Technique 2: Privilege.  The House standing rules authorize certain committees to call up 
certain kinds of bills or proposed resolutions simply on their own power, whenever they choose, 
because these measures generally have high urgency.  They are said to be privileged.  For 
example, the Appropriations Committee has power to call up general appropriations bills 
anytime, and the Rules Committee has power to call up a proposed simple resolution altering the 
House’s standing rules anytime.  Ordinary bills are not privileged.   
 
 Technique 3: Suspension of the Rules .  Any member can make a motion to “suspend the 
rules” and pass whatever bill she designates.  As with unanimous consent, a member wishing to 
make this motion must be recognized by the Speaker, so the leadership decides when the 
technique can be used.  Whe n this motion is made, the House automatically follows a special 
expedited procedure.  There are forty minutes of debate on the bill, and no amendments can be 
offered (except as part of the member’s initial motion to suspend).  At the end of debate, the House 
votes on the motion (and concomitantly on passage of the underlying bill), with two-thirds being 
required for success.  This is a technique for rapidly passing bills that are uncontroversial enough 
to win the suppor t of the leadership and a two -thirds majority, but not uncontroversial enough 
for unanimous consent.  The majority of bills called up for consideration on the House floor are 
under this procedure.   
 
 Technique 4: The Special Rule.  The special rule is the most important of the four 
techniques.  It is used for the most controversial bills and is key to the majority party’s control of 
the House.  We will discuss it in detail.   
 
 Recall that the House has standing rules, applying to the consideration of all bills.  These 
rules originate from simple resolutions.9  Crucially, it is possible for the House to adopt a simple 
resolution that sets down procedures that apply only to the consideration of one particular bill  
 
9 Or, if the standing rule is prescribed by a statute, each chamber can alter it via simple resolution.  See above, page 3, note 3.   

15 
 
 
 
and are tailor -made for the consideration of that one bill.  Such a simple resolution is called a 
“special rule.”  When a special rule is adopted for a particular bill, that bill is considered by the 
House according to the procedures laid down in the speci al rule, which (for the purpose of 
considering that one bill) carves out an exception to the ordinary standing rules of the House.   
 
 A special rule serves three important functions.  First, it provides for the bill to be called 
up for consideration on the floor immediately, or at some appointed time in the near future, so 
the House need not follow the default procedure of considering t he bill according to the order of 
the calendar.  In plucking the bill from the calendar, the special rule serves the same function as 
unanimous consent or suspension of the rules, but unlike those techniques, it requires only a 
simple majority —the majority  necessary to adopt any simple resolution—which is obviously 
easier to obtain than the two-thirds majority required by suspension of the rules, to say nothing 
of unanimous consent.   
 
 Second, the special rule can limit general debate on the bill.  Limiting general debate is 
useful to the bill’s proponents, since otherwise the bill’s opponents can drag out the debate and 
hold the chamber’s agenda hostage, pressuring the proponents to give up or make concessions.   
 
 Third, the special rule can limit the amendments that may be offered to the bill from the 
floor.  Limiting amendments is useful to the bill’s proponents because (a) the bill’s opponents can 
offer lots of frivolous amendments as an additional means to drag out the debate and (b) limiting 
amendments from the floor can prevent the members of the House from coalescing around an 
alternative to the bill.   
 
 For a special rule to take effect and actually govern consideration of the particular bill for 
which it is designed, the special rule must be adopted by a majority of the House, like any other 
simple resolution.  The process leading up to the adoption vote is interesting and important.  The 
key player is the House Rules Committee.  Up to the late 1800s, this committee was confined (as 
its name would suggest) to the humdrum work of managing the House’s standing rules—that is, 
considering and reporting propo sed simple resolutions to establish or alter standing rules on a 
general and permanent basis.  But then, in the 1880s, the Rules Committee began devising 
“special rules” on a bill-by-bill basis.  It would report them to the House and get them considered 
on the floor as privileged measures (see Technique 2, above).  And it would get the House to adopt 
them with frequency.  It has continued to do these things ever since.  In this way, the Rules 
Committee has effectively acquired the power, on controversial matters, to decide which bills get 
considered on the House floor.  If the Rules Committee dislikes a bill, it can (a) refuse to report a 
special rule for the bill, so the bill cannot be plucked from the calendar and will likely die at the 
end of the Congress, or (b) report a special rule that dooms the bill, e.g., by failing to limit debate 
or amendments in a way that the proponents want.  A more fitting name than “Rules Committee” 
would be “Floor Control Committee.”  It is the most powerful committee in the House.  Nothing 
controversial can be done without its help.   
 
 Who controls the Rules Committee?  That is the $64,000 question, for whoever controls 
the Rules Committee effectively controls the House floor agenda.  When the Rules Committee 
first invented special rules in the 1880s, it was under the control of the majority party leadership, 
with the Speaker as chair.  But in subsequent years, the committee varied in its relationship to 
the leadership, partly due to strong seniority norms.  In the 1950s, the Committee was famously 

16 
 
 
 
chaired by the segregationist Democrat Howard Smith, a “preference outlier” who held his post 
by virtue of seniority and used it to prevent civil rights bills supported by the liberal wing of his 
own caucus from reaching the floor.   
 
 Crucially, the Democratic party leadership seized control of the Rules Committee in the 
1970s, and the committee has been, ever since, an organ of the majority party leadership.  Th is 
has been true under both Democrats (up to 1995 and in 2007-11) and Republicans (in 1995-2007 
and since 2011).  The leadership keeps control by several means.  Whereas chairs and majority 
party members of most committees are initially selected by the party’s steering committee, those 
of the Rules Committee are selected by the Speaker alone.  And whereas most committees have 
their seats divvied up in proportion to the parties’ respective numbers in the chamber, the Rules 
Committee has an extra-large number of majority party members (9 out of 13).  The leadership’s 
control of the Rules Committee means agenda control in the House is now more concentrated in 
the leadership than at any time in U.S. history.  On the Committee’s  history, see C OX & 
MCCUBBINS, SETTING THE AGENDA, supra, at 55-65; Aldrich & Rohde, supra, at 220.   
 
 The leadership’s dominance of the House floor agenda derives not only from its control of 
the Rules Committee, but also from that committee’s ever more aggressive use of its powers.  As 
noted earlier, one of the functions of a special rule is to limit amendments from the floor, but this 
is optional: the special rule can pluck the bill from the calendar and limit general debate while 
leaving members free to offer amendments as they please.  In that case, it is called an open rule.  
(The other kinds of special rule are the closed rule, which prohibits all amendments except those 
recommended by the committee that reported the bill, and the structured rule, which allows 
amendments beyond those recommended by the committee reporting the bill, but only if they are 
hand-picked by the Rules Committee).  Historically, open rules were common.  But as the 
leadership has sought ever tighter control of the menu of options offered to the membership, limits 
on amendments have been growing.  In the 1970s , the proportion of special rules on major bills 
that were structured or closed hovered around 10% to 20%, but in the 1980s and 1990s, in a trend 
that continued under both Democrats and Republicans, it climbed to more than 70%.  Under the 
Republicans in 2005-07, the proportion reached 96%.  Under the Democrats in 2009 -11, it was 
99%.  S INCLAIR, supra, at 28, 150- 51.  Categorizations reported by the Republican Rules 
Committee for 2011-13, though not perfectly comparable to those just cited, indicate that 83% of 
all special rules were structured or closed—still a high proportion.   
 
 To the majority party, limiting amendments can bring great political advantages.  Agenda 
control often changes the outcome.  For example, say the Republicans are the majority party.  On 
a particular issue, a committee reports a bill embodying a conservati ve policy (C).  Other 
possibilities are a moderate policy (M) or a liberal policy (L).  And say there are three kinds of 
representatives: conservative Republicans, moderate Republicans, and Democrats.  The 
conservative Republicans prefer C, then M, then L.  The moderate Republicans prefer M, then C, 
then L.  The Democrats prefer L, then M, then C.  Imagine also that the conservative Republicans 
are more numerous than the moderate Republicans and that the Republican party leadership, 
reflecting this, is composed of conservatives.  But the conservative Republicans are not numerous 
enough to hold a majority of the chamber by themselves.  They need the moderate Republicans 
in order to achieve that.  Under these circumstances, what will happen to the bill?  It depends on 
which options are on the agenda.  If somebody can offer an amendment to substitute M for C, the 
Democrats can join with the Republican moderates to adopt M and pass the bill, thus rejecting C.  

17 
 
 
 
But the Republican leadership, consisting of conservatives, will prevent this from happening by 
having the Rules Committee report a structured special rule that permits no amendments to be 
offered except L.  The Republican caucus will provide the votes to adopt the proposed special rule.  
The bill will then be considered according to the special rule.  Democrats will offer L, but the 
special rule precludes anybody from offering M, so the moderate Republicans will join the rest of 
their party caucus in defeating L and passing C.   
 
 This hypothetical captures the essential dynamic of numerous actual House proceedings, 
but one aspect of it is puzzling.  The Republican leadership, consisting of conservatives, had to 
get the Republican caucus to provide the votes to adopt the special rule that the Rules Committee 
reported.  Republican moderates’ votes were essential to this.  Why would the moderates provide 
those crucial votes?  Wasn’t the special rule designed to prevent them from getting the policy they 
liked best?   
 
 These questions go to the deep structure of power in the House.  The power of the Rules 
Committee (and of the leadership that controls it) derives largely from the willingness of the 
majority party caucus to adopt whatever proposed special rule the Committee reports.  Why is 
the caucus —particularly its moderate members —so willing to do that?  One might say it is 
because moderates are ever shrinking in importance: polarization means that each party is more 
ideologically homogenous, so its moderates are less important to its achievement of the requisite 
majority for a special rule.  There is some truth to this.  And yet moderates still do exist, and they 
overwhelmingly vote with their party to adopt special rules.  Why?  There is an extremely strong 
norm that all members of the majority party caucus must always vote in favor of adopting a 
special rule reported by the Rules Committee.  The leadership regards disloyalty on the adoption 
of a special rule as the worst possible offense, deserving the worst kind of retaliation.  In the face 
of this fierce demand for loyalty, a moderate legislator is likely to acquiesce, for at least three 
reasons.  First, avoiding the obligation to make a choice publicly between the conservative (or 
liberal) bill and the moderate bill may spare the moderate legislator from the unpleasant dilemma 
of alienating either her primary electorate or her gener al electorate.  Second, the cost to the 
moderate legislator of voting with her party on adopting the special rule is small.  Even if her  
vote has the effect of structuring the agenda so as to advantage a policy that most of her 
constituents dislike, agenda manipulation is so difficult for voters to understand that she will 
probably incur little damage to her electoral prospects.  Third, ev en if she does incur some 
damage, the leadership gives her a helping hand in exchange for her sacrifice: the House 
leadership distributes campaign money disproportionately to those party members who are forced 
to depart farthest from their constituents’ pr eferences to maintain party cohesion.  (On 
maintaining party loyalty to adopt special rules, see  COX & MCCUBBINS, SETTING THE AGENDA, 
supra, at 25-34, 45-48; Jeffrey A. Jenkins & Nathan W. Monroe, Buying Negative Agenda Control 
in the U.S. House, 56 AM. J. POLI. SCI. 897 (2012).) 
 
 Actuated by these factors, majority party members do, in fact, exhibit very strong party 
loyalty in votes on special rules. 10  From January 2003 to May 2014 (as this Supplement is 
 
10 It is not only the vote on adopting the proposed special rule that is important, but also the immediately prior vote to cut o ff 
consideration of the proposed special rule.  By winning the vote to cut off consideration, the majority party leadership prevents 
there from being any amendments to the proposed special rule; preventing such amendments is crucial to agenda control.  Thus, 
the majority party leadership demands (and generally receives) absolute party loyalty on the vote to cut off consideration of the 
proposed special rule, just as it does on the vote to adopt the proposed special rule.  

18 
 
 
 
finalized), the House has voted on the adoption of hundreds of special rules under both parties, 
and not one has been defeated.  Given the allegiance it receives on these votes, the majority party 
leadership has tight control of the House floor agenda.  It tries and largely succeeds to put only 
those bills on the agenda that are supported by a majority of the ma jority party caucus.  In the 
period from 1991 through May 2014, there were, on average, only 1.7 bills that passed the House 
per year without the support of a majority of the majority party caucus.11   
 
 We close this discussion of House floor procedure with a rundown of how proceedings 
unfold when a special rule is used.  (1)  A member of the Rules Committee calls up the proposed 
special rule on the floor, as privileged business.  (2) The House debates the proposed special rule.  
(3) The House votes in favor of a motion for the previous question, i.e., to cut off debate on the 
proposed special rule and to prevent any amendments to it —a vote on which the majority party 
leadership demands absolute loyalty.  (4)  The House votes to adopt the proposed special rule —
another vote on which the leadership demands absolute loyalty.  (5) Now that the special rule has 
been adopted, the underlying bill is called up, either immediately or at some appointed time, 
depending on what the special rule says to do.  (6)  The House engages in general debate on the 
underlying bill, considers amendments to it, and votes on whether to pass it, according to the 
schedule and directives set forth in the special rule.12 
 
 During general debate and consideration of amendments on the underlying bill (to the 
extent the special rule allows such things), the key players on the House floor are the two floor 
managers.  One is designated by the majority party members of the committee that reported the 
bill, the other by the minority party members of that committee.  The job of each floor manager 
is to allocate whatever time is allowed to each party under the special rule.  Further, the floor 
managers often take the lead in explaining their parties’ respective views on the bill.  This 
frequently means that the majority floor manager, speaking in support of the bill, is called upon 
to explain what the bill means and answer questions about how it will operate.  The floor 
manager’s explanations can be an important source for agency officials or judges to discern the 
bill’s meaning, much like a committee report.  As with committee reports, critics question whether 
the floor manager’s statements are a reliable indication of what other members actually think.   
 
 
4.  FLOOR PROCEEDINGS IN THE SENATE 
 
 Like the House, the Senate has many bills on its calendar, varying in importance, and its 
default procedure is to consider these bills in the order of the calendar, that is, the order in which 
they were reported.  Like the House, the Senate never actually  follows that default but instead 
relies on techniques that can call up bills out of calendar order.  What are those techniques?  Here 
the similarity to the House ends.  The Senate has two techniques for calling up bills.  The first is 
the motion to proceed, which has no analogue in the House.  The second is unanimous consent , 
which, though superficially similar to unanimous consent in the House, plays a quite different 
role in the Senate.   
 
11 Calculations based on “House Votes Violating the ‘Hastert Rule,’” Inside Congress, New York Times  Website, available at 
http://politics.nytimes.com/congress/votes/house/hastert-rule (last visited June 21, 2014).   
12 Typically, the special rule will provide that the House, in order to engage in general debate and consider and vote on 
amendments, will temporarily convert itself into the committee of the whole—a body that is the same as the House itself, except 
that it operates under expedited procedures.   

19 
 
 
 
 
 Technique 1: The Motion to Proceed (herein of the Filibuster and Cloture) .  Any Senator 
can make a motion to proceed to consider any particular bill that is on the calendar.  The motion 
needs to win only a simple majority to succeed.  If it wins that, the Senate then takes the bill from 
the calendar and can consider it, amend i t (by a simple majority), and pass it (by a simple 
majority).   
 
 This sounds simple, but it is not.  Each step in the process just described —adopting the 
motion to proceed, making an amendment, and passing the bill—is subject to debate.  And Senate 
rules make it very difficult to cut off debate.  
 
 To understand this difficulty, we need some historical background.  The typical legislative 
body, when it comes to any debatable matter (adopting a motion, making an amendment, passing 
a bill), provides some method by which a majority can cut off debate and force a vote on the matter.  
This is traditionally called the previous question motion.  The Senate’s original standing rules in 
1789 contained language that seemed to provide for a previous question motion, but it was not so 
construed, and in any event, the Senate deleted the language upon revising its rules in 1806.  In 
the course of the 1800s, the Senate established a series of precedents construing the rulebook’s 
lack of a previous question motion to mean that the Senate had no power to halt debate on a bill 
and force a vote.  Similarly, the Senate had no way of limiting the offer of amendments and little 
means to limit frivolous motions (e.g., for quorum counts).  Thus, it was possible for one or more 
Senators to delay action on a bill indefinitely, so long as they kept talking, offering amendments, 
and making motions.  By the late 1800s, the use of these techniques of obstruction came to be 
known as a filibuster.   
 
 A filibuster was costly to the senator who carried it out.  It was tiring.  It ate up time for 
consideration of other bills that the filibustering senator wanted.  And it was considered uncouth, 
annoying, and abusive by other senators.  This carried weight, for the Senate in the nineteenth 
century was a small group of men who worked with each other according to a strong set of informal 
and personal norms and constraints.  Still, despite these costs, senators sometimes did filibuster, 
but only if they were strongly opposed to the bill at issue.   
 
 If a majority of senators supported a bill that was being filibustered, their only means of 
rescuing the bill was to “wait out” the filibuster.  That is, they would keep the Senate in session, 
in hope that the obstructers would become too tired, or too worried about their relationships with 
their colleagues, to keep obstructing.  But to do this, the bill’s supporters had to stick around the 
chamber, for if they did not, the Senate would lack a quorum and (once the obstructers called for 
a quorum count) would have to adjourn until some appointed time.  This would give the 
obstructers a break to go home to rest their voices, defeating the majority’s effort to tire them out.  
Thus, whenever the obstructing senators were giving long speeches, the supporters of the bill also 
needed to be there, so the obstructers could not simply go home and claim victory for the day.  
Thus, the filibuster was exhausting and costly to both sides.  The question was: which side would 
say “uncle” first?  Which side was willing to incur more exhaustion, more strained relations, and 
more loss of time for other business?  How badly did each side want victory on the particular bill 
that was being filibustered?  The filibuster was a test of the two sides’ intensity of preference.  
GREGORY J. WAWRO & ERIC SCHICKLER, FILIBUSTER: OBSTRUCTION AND LAWMAKING IN THE U.S. 
SENATE 25-54 (2006).   

20 
 
 
 
 
 Through the 1800s and early 1900s, there was no formal way to stop a filibuster.  And yet, 
for most of that period, filibusters were apparently rare.  There were a couple of reasons for this.  
First, the Senate’s workload was light enough that a bill’s supporters could “wait out” a filibuster 
without making too great a sacrifice in terms of other business.  Second, the Senate was a small 
group characterized by relatively tight personal relations, in which no member wanted to annoy 
his colleagues without a very good reason.  Hence, the filibuster was confined to the few bills that 
senators most wanted to block.  On most bills, no senator was willing to filibuster.  A major 
historical study of obstruction in the Senate, by Wawro and Schickler, finds that the nineteenth-
century Senate “functioned largely as a majoritarian body,” though coalition size tended to 
increase toward the end of each Congress, when the scarcity of time for remaining business meant 
that senators were more willing to give in to filibuster s, which meant other senators were more 
likely to conduct them.  WAWRO & SCHICKLER, supra, at 20.  See generally id. at 89-158; OLESZEK, 
supra, at 306.13 
 
 However, by the early 1900s, the Senate changed in several ways.  As more states joined 
the union, the membership became larger.  Turnover increased.  As railroads improved, senators 
increasingly made trips back to their states mid-session and spent less time in Washington.  Thus, 
their interactions with each other became depersonalized.  Face -to-face relations and informal 
norms provided less of a check on uncooperative and abusive behavior.  Individual senators were 
therefore more likely to obstruct.  In addition, the body’s workload increased, so that “waiting 
out” a filibuster became more costly in terms of the other business that had to be sacrificed.  
Majorities were therefore more likely to give up.  This made filibustering all the more tempting.  
As a result, filibusters grew more common in the late 1800s and early 1900s.  W AWRO & 
SCHICKLER, supra, at 181-210.   
 
 In response, the Senate in 1917 amended its standing rules to provide, for the first time, 
a formal motion to cut off debate on a matter, known as a cloture motion .  To be adopted, the 
motion required two-thirds of Senators present and voting.   
 
 But just as the absence of any cloture motion in 1806-1917 had not meant that unanimity 
was necessary for the Senate to pass a bill, so the invention of the two -thirds cloture motion in 
1917 did not mean that a two-thirds majority was necessary for the Senate to pass a bill.  From 
1917 through the 1960s, major bills commonly passed with less than a two-thirds majority, while 
successful cloture motions were very rare.  WAWRO AND SCHICKLER, supra, at 153-55, 213, 259.  
The reason was that majorities were still willing to “wait out” obstructers, so they had a means 
of defeating the filibuster even without a two-thirds vote.  Id. at 259.  (In 1975, the Senate altered 
the rule on cloture to require three-fifths of the whole Senate, i.e., 60 votes.) 
 
 But from the 1970s to the present, the Senate has been transformed: it has come to require 
cloture-level supermajorities as a matter of course, to reach a vote on virtually any major bill.  
The reason, it seems, is that Senate majorities have completely lost their willingness to “wait out” 
filibusters.  Why?  Recent decades have seen a further rise in the Senate’s workload, which has 
further increased the value of scarce legislative time.  And extra-legislative demands on senators’ 
 
13 Wawro and Schickler argue that another reason for the predominantly majoritarian norm was Senators’ awareness of the 
possibility that a simple majority could rein in obstruction using the procedural device of a ruling by the presiding officer .  
WAWRO & SCHICKLER, supra, at 61-62.  We discuss this device below (at pages 25-26).   

21 
 
 
 
time have reached unprecedented levels, due to changes in campaigns and elections that require 
shockingly long hours of fundraising and weekly trips back to one’s home state.  Under these 
conditions, the opportunity cost of “waiting out” filibusters is too great for senators.  Thus, if one 
or a few senators threaten to filibuster, the supporters of the bill either move for cloture or (if they 
lack the requisite supermajority) give up; they do not seriously consider forcing the prospective 
obstructers to burn up legislative time, for the sacrifice is too much.  From the perspective of a 
senator considering a filibuster, this alters the calculus dramatically.  The worst-case scenario is 
that you threaten to filibuster and are met with a successful cloture motion, but you need never 
actually filibuster.  Thus, threatening to filibuster has become costless, and senators make such 
threats on virtually every significant bill with which they seriously disagree.  No longer do they 
reserve the tactic for the occasional bill that they intensely oppose, on which they are willing to 
fight a war of attrition.  WAWRO & SCHICKLER, supra, at 259-64; OLESZEK, supra, at 308-09.   
 
 With senators threatening to filibuster as a matter of course, cloture-level supermajorities 
have become a virtual necessity for passage.  Thus, from the 1970s to the 1990s, the Senate 
evolved toward its present de facto requirement of a 60-vote supermajority to pass any major bill.  
Accordingly, there has been an exponential increase in the average number of times per Congress 
that cloture has been successfully invoked:  
 
1963-1973   1.4  
1973-1983 10.0 
1983-1993  13.4  
1993-2003  20.6  
2003-2013 42.2  
 
Compiled from Senate Action on Cloture Motions , U.S. Senate Website, available at  
www.senate.gov/pagelayout/reference/cloture_motions/clotureCounts.htm (last visited June 20, 
2014).14 
 
 One might think that, if a bill’s proponents gather sixty votes to end debate on the bill, 
they can simply move for cloture, get the motion adopted, and immediately proceed to pass the 
bill.  But it is not that simple.  Merely to make the cloture motion, one must gather sixteen 
signatures.  There is then a two -day waiting period before the motion can be voted on (during 
which the Senate is free to do other business).  If the motion, once voted on, receives the requisite 
sixty votes, the bill can then be considered yet further: each senator is entitled to speak for up to 
one hour, unless and until the total amount of post -cloture consideration reaches thirty hours.  
 
14 If proposed legislation involves taxes or mandatory spending, the Senate may be able to circumvent the need for 60 votes by 
considering the bill under the elaborate procedure known as reconciliation , set forth in the Budget Act of 1974 and related 
amendments and chamber rules.  Under this procedure, the House and Senate, when adopting the annual Budget Resolution, 
can include therein instructions to committees of the two chambers to devise a limited number of bills altering taxes and/or 
mandatory spending; those bills are then considered by the two chambers under expedited procedures set down in the Act.  A 
reconciliation bill on the Senate floor is subject to a limited number of hours of debate, so c loture is unnecessary, and the bill 
needs only a simple majority.  Although the reconciliation procedure was originally intended to reduce the deficit, its capac ity 
to neutralize the filibuster has motivated senators of both parties to stretch its applicability to a broader range of measures, so 
long as those measures have something to do with taxes and/or mandatory spending.  For example, Republicans in 2001 used 
reconciliation to pass tax cuts that increased the deficit, while Democrats in 2009 planned to  use it to pass health care reform 
(though ultimately they used other means).  Just how far the procedure can be stretched depends on how the Senate’s presiding 
officer interprets the confusing and vague provisions of the Budget Act as amended—and also how  artfully a policy change is 
drafted so that it seems oriented toward taxes and mandatory spending.  OLESZEK, supra, at 86-91.   

22 
 
 
 
Only then is further consideration precluded, i.e., the Senate must, at last, vote on the bill itself.  
During post-cloture consideration, senators may offer amendments, and the senate may adopt 
them, but only up to the time limit.15   
 
 And there is yet another layer of complexity.  The foregoing discussion focuses solely on 
the invocation of cloture on passage of the bill itself.  But passage is only one of several stages in 
a bill’s progress that are subject to debate and to filibuster—and therefore in need of cloture.  The 
motion to proceed is subject to debate, so if any senator threatens to filibuster it, the majority will 
need to make a cloture motion to end debate on the motion to proceed and get the cloture motion 
adopted, and even if such cloture motion is adopted, there can then be up to one hour of further 
consideration per senator (capped at a total of thirty hours) before the Senate can actually vote 
to adopt the motion to proceed. 16  This same principle applies to every single amendment.  An 
amendment is debatable and therefore subject to filibuster, for which the majority may need to 
invoke cloture, and even if the majority succeeds on that, it then faces up to thirty more hours of 
consideration before the Senate can vote on adopting the amendment. 17  Moreover, the principle 
applies to the adoption of a conference report.18   
 
 The upshot is that, if the obstructers are determined, they can force a supermajority to 
invoke cloture, and then consume up to thirty hours of Senate floor time, on each of several 
occasions—on the motion to proceed;  on each and every amendment that the b ill’s proponents 
want to make (though usually the proponents just want a single amendment in the nature of a 
substitute, often the committee -approved version of the bill); on passage of the bill; and  on the 
adoption of a conference report.  Thus, even when  there are sixty or more senators in favor of a 
bill, the opponents can put the Senate to much trouble, consuming time that would otherwise be 
available for other business.  In proceedings on the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) in 2009, the 
Republicans lacked the votes to defeat the 60 -member coalition for the bill, but they forced four 
cloture votes (on the motion to proceed, two amendments, and final passage), and after two of 
those votes, they insisted on the full thirty hours of post-cloture consideration.  SINCLAIR, supra, 
 
15 During post-cloture consideration, the majority leader—whose position gives him the privilege of offering amendments before 
anyone else—has increasingly tended to “fill the amendment tree,” i.e., to offer amendments of his own, up to the Senate’s limit 
on the number and type of amendments that can be pending at any one time.  The majority leader and his allies then deliberate 
on those amendments at length, in order to run down the post -cloture clock.  Their goal in doing so is to prevent opponents of 
the bill from offering amendments of their own, which (if offered) would threaten to unravel the coalition for the bill, or force 
members of the coalition to take politically difficult votes.  The technique of filling the amendment tree, when combined with 
cloture, is a jerry-rigged means of controlling the agenda, similar in function to the House’s special rule, but harder to use and 
less straightforward.   
16 A rule change in January 2013 (113 S. Res. 16) allows the Senate to avoid the round of post-cloture consideration in the case 
of a successful cloture motion on a motion to proceed, but only if the cloture motion meets a test of bipartisan consensus: it must 
be signed by the majority leader and minority leader, plus another seven Democrats and seven Republicans.   
17 Theoretically, if 60+ senators support an amendment in the nature of a substitute and want the bill, thus amended, to pass, 
they could (1) invoke cloture on the bill itself and (2)  vote to make the amendment during post -cloture consideration, without 
having to make a cloture motion (and incur an addition al round of up to 30 hours of post -cloture consideration) on the 
amendment.  The problem with this strategy is that an amendment in the nature of a substitute will typically be so long that it 
will contain at least some material that is not germane to the original bill, and amendments during post-cloture consideration 
are required (by the Senate’s standing rules) to be germane.  Thus, the proponents will typically make the amendment prior to 
invoking cloture on the actual bill, which allows them to escape the germaneness requirement, thought it also means the making 
of the amendment will require its own cloture motion (and entail its own round of post -cloture consideration, up to 30 hours).  
See CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE, INVOKING CLOTURE IN THE SENATE 3 (March 27, 2013).   
18 Until recently, the multiple procedural steps necessary to initiate  a conference were also subject to this principle and thus 
could result in yet more rounds of post-cloture consideration.  Under the rule change of January 2013 (113 S. Res. 16), initiating 
conference is still debatable, and debate can still be cut off only by a cloture vote, but if the cloture vote is successful, the post-
cloture consideration is no longer required.   

23 
 
 
 
at 199-210.   
 
 These events signify the power of a Senate minority to consume floor time even when it 
loses on cloture.  Senators who want to do a substantial amount of business can incur such loss of 
time only on the few bills to which they are most committed; if such a large amount of time were 
expended on every bill, then very few bills would pass during the session.  Thus, even if a party 
or coalition commands a 60 -plus supermajority in the Senate, this does not mean it can pass 
whatever legislation it wants.  It will be able to pass only a limited number of bills, for a minority 
of (say) twenty to forty senators can prevent all but the most important business from being done.  
On all but the most important business, even a majority of 60+ senators must compromise.  Thus, 
it is wrong to say simply that the Senate needs a 60 -vote supermajority in order to do business; 
rather, if it wants to do a substantial quantity of business, it practically requires the cooperation 
of an even larger supermajority.   
 
 Technique 2: Unanimous Consent.  In the Senate, floor proceedings are dangerous for two 
reasons, both having to do with the wide individual autonomy of each senator.  First, a  senator’s 
freedom to offer amendments on any subject means she can disrupt the coalitions that her 
colleagues are building and/or force her colleagues to take positions on matters about which they 
would prefer to remain silent.  Second, a senator’s freedom to debate without limit can eat up 
precious legislative time.  In light of these factors, senators are reluctant to take up a bill unless 
they can be assured in advance that (a)  amendments will be limited and (b)  time will not be 
wasted.  When the Senate takes up a bill via the motion to proceed, it can accomplish these goals 
by adopting a cloture motion, albeit in a blunt, one-size-fits-all manner.   
 
 But the Senate has another option besides the motion -to-proceed-followed-by-cloture: it 
can impose any structure it wants on a proceeding if it does so by unanimous consent.  Any senator 
(customarily the majority leader) may ask unanimous consent that the Senate take a particular 
bill from the calendar and consider it according to some set of tailor -made procedures, with 
limitations on debate and amendments (often a list of designated amendments that are the only 
ones that can be offered).  If nobody objects, the proposal is adopted by the Senate, and it becomes 
just as binding on the Senate—as affecting the particular bill—as the body’s standing rules.  Such 
a proposal is known as a unanimous consent agreement (UCA).   
 
 In some ways, the senatorial UCA is similar to a special rule in the House.  It is a tailor-
made procedural regime for a particular bill.  It supersedes the body’s standing rules as to that 
bill.  And it functions to call up the bill and limit debate and amendments.  But there is an obvious 
and profound difference between a House special rule and a senatorial UCA: a special rule can be 
adopted by a simple majority of the chamber, whereas a senatorial UCA requires the consent of 
all members of the chamber.  Instead of being devised unilaterally by the majority party 
leadership (as is a special rule), the senatorial UCA is hammered out as a compromise, usually in 
closed-door meetings involving the majority leader and minority leader.  The UCA is a consensus-
oriented means of floor management that became customary in the Senate long before the present 
era of partisan polarization, when the Senate was far more collegial than it is now.  In today’s 
atmosphere, unanimity is harder to achieve than in the past, and the Senate runs less smoothly.   
 
 Despite this, the Senate still uses UCAs to call up, and structure proceedings on, the large 
majority of bills it considers each year.  Members of the minority agree to UCAs for several 

24 
 
 
 
reasons.  One is that many bills are minor and uncontroversial. 19  Another is that UCAs can be 
structured in such a way as to attract minority support.  For example, senators may draft a UCA 
so that it preserves some of the advantages that the minority would enjoy under the motion- to-
proceed-followed-by-cloture, such as a provision stating that the bill must have sixty votes in 
order to pass.  Minority senators may agree to UCAs on low-stakes bills that the majority wants 
in exchange for UCAs on low-stakes bills that they themselves want.   
 
 Still, it sometimes proves impossible for the two parties to nail down a UCA that provides 
a complete structure for debate and amendments on a bill.  In that case, senators may be willing 
to adopt an incomplete UCA, which calls up the bill and provides a structure for the initial stage 
of the debate, in hope that, once that stage is complete, senators will have worked out a second 
UCA to cover the next stage.  If no second-stage agreement can be hammered out, the debate may 
continue, like a high-wire act without a net, but if senators begin obstructing or offering coalition-
disrupting amendments, the bill’s supporters will need to decide whether to seek cloture or give 
up.   
 
 Everyday Life on the Senate Floor.  Now that we know how motions to proceed and UCAs 
work, we can understand how business on the Senate floor unfolds day -to-day.  The Senate 
majority leader—a weaker officer than the Speaker of the House—has only one significant power: 
the right to hold the floor, whenever he wishes.  Using this right, he serves as a kind of traffic cop 
for the Senate’s business, meaning that he personally makes motions to proceed and submits 
UCAs, or signals other senators to do so.  In ma king these scheduling proposals (or signaling 
others to make them), the majority leader is merely acting as a clearinghouse for the preferences 
of the chamber at large.  He makes a motion to proceed only if (1) he has 60 votes, which usually 
requires a compromise between his own party and several minority -party members, and (2) his 
party considers the bill important enough to incur the cost of invoking cloture.  He submits a UCA 
only if it has been checked with all the members of his own caucus and blessed by the minority 
leader (who, in turn, has checked it with all the members of his own caucus).  If the party leaders, 
in checking a proposed UCA with their caucuses, find that any senator is not willing to consent 
to the UCA, they will refrain from submitting it on the floor.  When a senator says she will not 
consent to a UCA, she is said to be placing a hold on the bill.  When that happens, proponents of 
the bill will often contact the holding senator to see if they can reach a compromise with her, e.g., 
an incomplete UCA.  If that fails, the proponents must decide whether they want to try to 
persuade the majority leader and other colleagues to mount a campaign for cloture —or simply 
give up.   
 
 Can the Filibuster Be Abolished?  The filibuster is available because the Senate’s standing 
rules provide no means for a simple majority to cut off debate on a bill and force a vote 
immediately.  The Senate’s standing rules can of course be changed by simple resolution, but such 
a simple resolution is debatable.  A cloture motion is available to end that debate, but the standing 
rules say that such a motion requires 67 votes (not the usual 60).  Winning such a vote would 
require minority senators to vote to disempower themselves, which seems unlikely.   
 
 There is a possible way to abolish the filibuster without formally amending the Senate 
rules, recently nicknamed the “nuclear option.”  The interpretation of the Senate’s existing rules 
 
19 Indeed, it is common for a UCA on a minor bill to provide simply that the bill be called up and instantly passed, with no debate 
or amendments.  When a senator proposes such a UCA and nobody objects, the bill instantly passes the chamber.   

25 
 
 
 
occurs via rulings by the presiding officer.  By the standing rules, such rulings can be appealed to 
the chamber, where they are decided by a simple majority, and there is a mechanism for a simple 
majority to cut off debate on such an appeal.  Thus, senato rs opposed to the filibuster can argue 
that the Senate rules should be interpreted to empower a simple majority of the Senate to cut off 
debate on a bill.  Such an interpretation fits oddly with the text of the Senate’s rules, which clearly 
provide that a supermajority is necessary to cut off debate.  And it clashes with well-established 
precedent.20  But if 51 or more Senators nevertheless adopt this interpretation on appeal, there 
is no formal way of stopping them, as the Constitution makes the Senate supreme as to its own 
rules.  The question is ultimately decided in the political arena.  Gregory Koger, Filibustering and 
Majority Rule in the Senate: The Contest Over Judicial Nominations, 2003 -2005, in WHY NOT 
PARTIES? PARTY EFFECTS IN THE UNITED STATES SENATE 159-77 (Nathan Monroe, David Rohde, 
& Jason Roberts, eds., 2008).  In November 2013, a majority of 52 Senators (all Democrats) used 
this method to abolish the filibuster for all judicial nominations (except to the Supreme Court) 
and all executive-branch nominations, though not for bills.  159 CONG. REC. S8418 (daily ed. Nov. 
21, 2013). 
 
 An interesting puzzle is why the Senate so far has refrained from the nuclear option when 
it comes to bills.  Why has it been impossible, in the realm of legislation, to assemble 51 senators 
to disempower the senators occupying the spots #52 through #60 on the chamber’s political 
spectrum?  One possibility is that the filibuster provides political cover that senators at or near 
the 51st spot find valuable.  If (say) the Democrats control the Senate, Democratic senators near 
the 51st spot are likely to be moderates who must face liberal primary electorates.  If bills could 
pass with 51 votes, these moderates would come under pressure to vote for more liberal policies 
than if every bill required 60 votes— pressure that moderates might like to avoid.  Another 
possibility is that senators become socialized to the chamber’s customs and especially to the 
promise that senators will continue to be individually powerful even when their party loses 
control.  This is consistent with the fact that senior senators tend to be most resistant to reform.  
Eric Schickler & Gregory J. Wawro, What the Filibuster Tells Us About the Senate, 9 THE FORUM, 
Issue 4, Article 11 (2011).  That said, it should be noted that the nuclear option, though never 
actually used for legislation, has still had some effect in that realm.  The threat of it has helped 
to win 67 -vote majorities for incremental rule changes, including the 1975 reduction of the 
ordinary cloture threshold to 60 votes.  WAWRO & SCHICKLER, FILIBUSTER, supra, at 266-68. 
 
5. RECONCILING HOUSE AND SENATE DIFFERENCES 
 
 When one chamber passes a bill, it is automatically received in the other chamber, which 
is the equivalent of its being introduced there.  The bill has no special status in the other chamber.  
It is subject to the same procedures (or shortcuts around procedures) as any other bill.   
 
 To get to the President, the bill must pass both chambers in identical form.  The simplest 
way for this to happen is for the chamber receiving the bill to pass it in the form received.  But if 
the receiving chamber instead passes the bill with alterations, it goes back to the originating 
chamber, as altered.  The originating chamber can then (1) pass the altered bill, in which case it 
goes to the President, (2)  vote to insist on its own pre -alteration version, in which case the bill 
goes back to the other chamber, or (3) make its own alteration, creating a third version of the bill, 
 
20 The proponents of the interpretation may rely directly on the Constitution, which expressly provides supermajorities for some 
matters (e.g., impeachment), suggesting the framers intended a simple majority for all other matters.   

26 
 
 
 
which goes to the other chamber.  The bill can keep going back and forth, in a process nicknamed 
ping pong, until both chambers pass the same text.   
 
 But there is one other option: the two chambers can set up a conference committee, that is, 
an inter-chamber body charged with producing a compromise bill on which the two chambers then 
vote.  Historically, Congress has frequently set up conference committees on major bills, and these 
bodies have exercised tremendous influence.  Recent ly, however, their use and influence have 
declined precipitously.  This is due to partisan polarization.  When the House and Senate are 
controlled by different parties, confe rence committees may not be formed, or may be unable to 
come to agreement.  And even when the House and Senate are controlled by the same party, the 
House leadership tends to exploit the conference process aggressively for partisan gain, which 
prompts the Senate minority caucus to use the filibuster to stop the Senate from agreeing to form 
a conference committee in the first place.  In the early 1990s, more than 90 bills per Congress 
went to conference, but in the 112th Congress (2011 -13), the number was se ven.  To the extent 
that Congress today passes any major bills, it is more commonly through ping pong.  Still, 
conference committees merit our attention, for many statutes presently on the books were 
hammered out partly in conference, and it always possible that conference committees could make 
a comeback.   
 
 The process of setting up a conference committee can begin once the two chambers have 
passed bills that have the same number (e.g., H.R. 123) but different texts.  One chamber can 
then vote to ask for a conference, and the other chamber can vote to accept the invitation.  In the 
Senate, 41 or more senators can use the filibuster to stop the Senate from making or accepting 
an invitation to go to conference.21   
 
 If the chambers do agree to go to conference, they must then choose their respective 
conferees.  Each chamber can choose as many conferees as it wants.  Usually, the House chooses 
a large number and the Senate a small number.  This makes no difference to the outcome, for the 
conference can only issue its report if a majority of the House conferees and  a majority of the 
Senate conferees vote for it.  Officially, House conferees are chosen by the Speaker and Senate 
conferees by the Senate’s presiding officer ; in practice, each of these officers chooses a slate of 
Republicans and Democrats reflecting the two parties’ numbers in the chamber.  For much of the 
twentieth century, conferees from each party caucus would be the senior -most members of the 
standing committee that had reported the bill.  Thus, conference reinforced seniority norms and 
committee turf.  But since the 1970s, in keeping with trends discussed above, seniority and 
committee power have declined in importance, and the leaders of the party caucuses have 
asserted somewhat broader discretion in choosing conferees, appointing themselves or choosing 
members with more attention to ideological loyalty.  When a bill is multiply referred in the House, 
conferee spots are distributed to members of the various committees that reported the bill, 
undermining any one committee’s monopoly on the process.   
 
 If majorities of the House conferees and of the Senate conferees are able to agree on a 
compromise bill, the conference committee sends it to the two chambers, where it is labeled the 
conference report .  The conference report is privileged business in both chambers, so any 
 
21 As noted above (page 22, note 18), a recent rule change (113 S. Res. 16) limits the amount of post-cloture obstruction that a 
Senate minority can create on decisions to go to conference, but cloture is still required, so 60 votes are still needed to g o to 
conference.    

27 
 
 
 
lawmaker can get it called up on the floor at virtually any time.  Crucially, the standing rules of 
each chamber provide that the conference report cannot be amended.  The vote must be all -or-
nothing.  This puts pressure on each chamber to accept the compromise bill “as is,” for a negative 
vote means the opportunity to enact a bill on the subject may be lost for the indefinite future.  
Such pressure means that the conferees wield great power, for they are the ones who decide what 
the content of the “must- pass” bill will be.  (Although the conference report can be called up 
automatically and cannot be amended, it is still subject to general debate.  This means that, in 
the Senate, the conference report can be filibustered and effectively requires 60 votes.  I n the 
House, consideration of a conference report is often governed by a special rule, which limits 
general debate.)   
 
 Conference committee proceedings have long been an occasion for hardball, which has 
intensified in recent years.  See, e.g., Seth Grossman, Tricameral Legislating: Statutory 
Interpretation in an Era of Conference Committee Ascendancy, 9 N.Y.U. J. LEGIS & PUBLIC POLICY 
251 (2005).  Historically, conference committees were secretive, working major alterations in bills 
without outside input or explanation, trusting that the all- or-nothing vote would force the two 
chambers to accede.  Both chambers in the 1970s adopted sta nding rules mandating that 
conference deliberations be public, but no rules prohibit conferees from meeting secretly in 
advance of the public meetings, so decisions are still made in closed-door gatherings, which now 
often exclude the minority party.  Supposedly, the conference committee’s discretion to originate 
new policy is constrained by rules and precedents stating that each provision of the compromise 
bill must fall within the “scope” of the analogous provisions in the House and Senate bills.  Thus, 
if the House bill authorizes a certain dollar amount for a program and the Senate bill a different 
dollar amount, the dollar amount in the conference report is supposed to fall between the two 
numbers.  But for non- numerical provisions, the definition of th e “scope” created by the House 
and Senate bills is subjective, and conferees may interpret the scope creatively to do as they 
please.  Theoretically, a member in either chamber can raise a point of order against the 
conference report if it violates the sco pe requirements, but practically, members are under 
pressure to accept the report or lose the bill (and, in the House, a special rule may bar anybody 
from making a point of order).  If the conference issues its report near the end of the session (or, 
in the case of the House, near the date for a vote set by special rule), members may not have 
enough time to read the bill before voting, forcing them to take the conferees’ product on blind 
faith, or lose the chance to legislate.   
 
 In addition to the compromise bill itself, the conferees also issue a joint explanatory 
statement, which is supposed to contain an explanation of why they wrote each provision as they 
did.  In fact, the document can be as informative or uninformative as the conferees want it to be.  
When substantive, the joint explanatory statement is a very attractive source to agency officials 
and judges interpreting the statute, since it may be the only discussion of why a provision took 
the final form that it did.  By contrast, ping pong —in which the party leaders usually take the 
lead in negotiating changes and do so behind closed doors— does not result in any document 
analogous to the joint explanatory statement.  Hence, ping pong produces less for interpreters to 
go on.  But for all its value, the joint explanatory statement is subject to the same criticisms as a 
committee report, particularly that it may reflect the views only of the conferees and not of the 
two chambers that ultimately adopt the report.  Indeed, the criticism has more force in the case 
of conference committees, since a joint explanatory statement (in contrast to a committee report) 
cannot contain “additional views” by individual conferees, meaning there is less of a constraint 

28 
 
 
 
on rogue conferees “slipping in” language opportunistically.   
 
6.  CONGRESSIONAL PROCEDURES IN LITIGATION 
 
 Though the process for enacting a federal statute (including the documents produced along 
the way) may be of interest to judges and agency officials in discerning the statute’s meaning, the 
process is not relevant for determining the statute’s validity .  Once a bill is passed in identical 
form by both chambers, a version of it known as the enrolled bill  is signed, in each chamber, by 
the presiding officer, during open session.  This open-session signing is an attestation by the two 
officers that the bill w as passed according to constitutionally valid procedures.  So long as this 
open-session signing occurred, judges will not ask questions about the process of the bill’s 
passage—not even questions about whether the process was constitutionally valid (e.g., whether 
the versions of the bill voted on by the House and Senate differed from each other, or from the 
enrolled bill).  Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649 (1892).  Federal courts’ unwillingness to scrutinize the 
procedures by which Congress enacts a statute cont rasts starkly with those courts’ enthusiasm 
for scrutinizing the procedures by which a federal agency promulgates a regulation.  Is this 
difference justified?   
 
 The hands-off attitude of the federal courts toward Congress is not inevitable.  Some state 
courts, in dealing with state statutes, scrutinize legislative procedures to ensure that they 
conformed to the state constitution; if courts find a violation, they  may hold the statute 
unconstitutional.  Bear in mind that many state constitutions specify more elaborate procedures 
for their respective legislatures than the U.S. Constitution imposes on Congress (e.g., that a bill 
can only address a “single subject,” that no bill can ever bypass committee, that no bill can have 
its original “purpose” changed after it has been introduced, etc.).  See Robert F. Williams, State 
Constitutional Limits on Legislative Procedure: Legislative Compliance and Judicial 
Enforcement, 48 U. PITT. L. REV. 797 (1987).   
 
7.  A WORD ON DRAFTING STATUTORY TEXT 
 
 The thing that the House and Senate formally vote to pass—and the thing that a President 
ultimately signs—is the text of the bill.  Bill text can be produced and altered at virtually every 
stage of the process: introduction, markup, amendments on the floor, conference committee, etc.  
Members are in the business of evaluating bills and amendments and deciding how to vote on 
them, but they generally do not draft such text themselves.  And unlike some states, the federal 
government does not have any laws or rules telling lawmakers to use a designated group of official 
draftsmen.  Members  can introduce bills and offer amendments written by anybody.  As a 
practical matter, members rely upon four groups of people to draft:  
 
 1. Agency Personnel.  The hardest thing about drafting a bill is that you must understand 
the preexisting law in the subject area to which your bill pertains.  If you do not, your bill may 
interact with that preexisting law in unintended and potentially disastrous ways.  If a federal 
agency already operates in the area, it is probable that nobody on Earth knows the preexisting 
law better than the agency’s employees (especially its career civil servants), for they “live” the 
law, day in and day out, for years on end.  Indeed, when Congress legislates in an area, it is 
commonly because agency personnel have identified a problem in the workings of the current law.  
As Justice Frankfurter wrote in one regulatory case: “From the very beginning of our government 

29 
 
 
 
in 1789, federal legislation like that now under review has usually not only been sponsored but 
actually drafted by the appropriate executive agency.”  Cloverleaf Butter Co. v. Patterson , 315 
U.S. 148, 177 (1942) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).  On agencies’ continued importance in drafting 
today, see Katzmann, supra, at 659.   
 
 2. Congressional Committee Staff.  When Justice Frankfurter cast agencies as the usual 
drafters of federal legislation in 1942, he was speaking at a time when those agencies had tens of 
thousands of professional employees, while Congress had little in- house staff and almost no 
permanent professional committee staff.  From the 1940s to the 1970s, Congress caught up, hiring 
professional staff for each of its committees that today total more than 2,000 people.  H ARRISON 
W. FOX, JR. & SUSAN WEBB HAMMOND, CONGRESSIONAL STAFFS: THE INVISIBLE FORCE IN 
AMERICAN LAWMAKING 19-25 (1977).  On each committee, staff slots are divided among the 
majority and minority parties, with the majority party having the lion’s share.  Majority staff 
serve at the pleasure of the chair, minority staff at the pleasure of the ranking member.  
Committee staffers acquire substantial policy expertise, though their numbers are smaller than 
those of agency personnel, meaning they usually cannot achieve the degree of specialized 
knowledge that agencies have.  Congressional committee chairs or ranking  members may 
nonetheless prefer to rely on committee staff, for the staffers’ loyalty (as co-partisans and at-will 
employees) is more assured than that of career civil servants.  Committee staff thus play a major 
role in drafting bill text (and are the main authors of committee reports, as discussed earlier).   
 
 3. Legislative Counsel.  Since 1918, Congress has had two Offices of Legislative Counsel, 
one for the House and one for the Senate, to provide professional drafting services at the request 
of any member.  Tiny in their early decades, the two offices grew substantially during the second 
half of the twentieth century.  Today the House Office has about 50 attorney- drafters and the 
Senate Office about 40.  Unlike committee staff, Legislative Counsel attorneys are nonpartisan.  
Whenever a congressman requests d rafting services, Legislative Counsel attorneys provide it; 
they view the congressman as their client and consider themselves to be in a fiduciary relationship 
to him or her.  Hence, they profess loyalty to members, but it is the loyalty of a lawyer to each of 
a rotating series of clients, not the loyalty of Democrat to Democrat or Republican to Republican.  
Indeed, an attorney in the Office may need to provide service to a Democrat one day and a 
Republican the next .  As for expertise, Legislative Counsel a ttorneys are both more and less 
specialized than committee staff: more specialized in that they focus on bill-drafting and nothing 
else; less specialized in that their numbers are small compared to committee staff, so they cannot 
have nearly as fine a division of labor as those staff (to say nothing of the even finer division 
among agency personnel).  In other words, Legislative Counsel attorneys cannot have nearly the 
policy expertise of committee staffers.  They are experts only in drafting per se.  In a recent survey, 
many committee staffers observed that Legislative Counsel attorneys have now become very 
prominent drafters of congressional legislation, but some added that Legislative Counsel’s lack of 
expertise in policy was causing an odd disconnect between drafting and policy formulation.  Also, 
given that committee staff generally write committee reports, a bill’s text and its legislative 
history become strangely separated in terms of their authorship.  Gluck & Bressman, supra , at 
967-69; see also Lisa  Schultz Bressman & Abbe R. Gluck, Statutory Interpretation from the 
Inside—An Empirical Study of Congressional Drafting, Delegation, and the Canons: Part II , 66 
STAN. L. REV. 725, 737-47 (2014). It may be that, in the case of many statutes, the nitty-gritty of 
the bill text and the policy discourse of the committee report have a common ancestor in a 
conceptual plan hammered out by the key lawmakers.  But that plan does not become part of the 

30 
 
 
 
public record and is not citable in litigation.   
 
 4. Private Lobbyists .  There is nothing to stop members of Congress from introducing 
language drafted by representatives of business corporations, trade associations, labor unions, 
environmental groups, or other private entities.  Clearly this does happen, though it is hard to 
find systematic data on the practice.  E.g., Eric Lipton & Ben Protess, Banks’ Lobbyists Help in 
Drafting Financial Bills, N.Y. TIMES DEALBOOK, May 23, 2013 (“Industry officials acknowledged 
that they played a role in drafting the legislation, but argued that the practice was common in 
Washington”).  Enlisting lobbyists as drafters may be a way of assuring the relevant interest 
groups that lawmaker s are deferring to their views, or to the deals that interest groups make 
among themselves.  E.g., Ryan Lizza, Getting to Maybe, NEW YORKER, June 24, 2013, at 51 (noting 
that, in devising an immigration bill, Senators Lindsey Graham and Charles Schumer “met 
privately with the leaders of the A.F.L. -C.I.O. and the Chamber of Commerce and told them to 
write that provision [on guest workers] them selves” and quoting a Schumer aide stating, “We 
basically told them, if you guys reach an agreement amongst yourselves, we won’t question it” 
and will “just slide your version of it into [the] bill”).  Alternatively, members may call upon 
lobbyists for dra fting services because lobbyists have high levels of expertise, both in the 
substantive policy and the preexisting law.  In some contexts, lobbyists are the only people who 
know as much as the agency personnel, and they may know more.  (Indeed, they may be  former 
agency personnel).  Victoria F. Nourse & Jane S. Schacter, The Politics of Legislative Drafting: A 
Congressional Case Study, 77 N.Y.U. L. REV. 575, 587-88, 610-13 (2002).  On the importance of 
lobbyists as information sources to lawmakers, see Richard L. Hall & Alan V. Deardorff, Lobbying 
as a Legislative Subsidy, 100 AM. POLI. SCI. REV. 69 (2006).   
 
 A Word About Reading .  Several sources passingly note that m embers of Congress may 
not read the text of the bills or amendments on which they vote.  E.g., Nourse & Schacter, supra, 
at 593, 608; OLESZEK, supra, at 275 n.71, 358; SINCLAIR, supra, at 99.  This may sound shocking 
but is perhaps not surprising on reflection.  Members are extremely busy and are called upon to 
vote on numerous texts, sometimes hundreds of pages in length and under time pressure.  
Statutory text is often so technically involved and interlaced with complex preexisting law as to 
be incomprehensible even to smart people.  Specialists are needed to translate.  So it is 
understandable that members defer to staffers, allied lobbyists, or others to tell them what text 
means.  One also imagines that members engage in triage when reading, directly examining those 
provisions that dispose of the most contested issues and memorialize the most hard-fought deals.   
 
B. INTRODUCTION TO STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 
 
1. WHY READING STATUTES IS HARD 
 
 No introduction to the regulatory state can be complete without some exposure to the 
complexities of statutory interpretation and construction. The majority of legal questions 
concerning the scope of what an agency is allowed to do require lawyers (and frequently, judges) 
to go back to an agency’s authorizing statutes and try to figure out both what their words mean 
and how they are best applied to situations in dispute. 
 
 Such processes of interpretation are notoriously complex.  The complexity partly inheres 
in properties of language, which inevitably is sometimes ambiguous or vague – conditions all the 

31 
 
 
 
more likely to arise  if (as often happens) legislators reach agreement on a bill by refraining from 
resolving points on which they differ . But t he complexity also results from an inescapable 
relationship between practices of statutory construction and debatable theories of government – 
theories, that is, regarding both what makes U.S. government action legitimate and how 
institutions ought to behave in order to secure that legitimacy. 
 
 To see this point clearly, imagine two citizens with very different views of what constitutes 
sound democratic practice.  In one citizen’s view, the core value commitment of American 
government is to plebiscitary accountability.  In other words, for that citizen, legitimacy rests 
overwhelmingly on governance by people who hold their positions as a result of free and fair 
elections.  Such a citizen would presumably want to minimize the role that unelected judges or 
unelected bureaucrats play in making the hard interpretive decisions that delimit an agency’s 
authority.  Unelected officials lack the electoral mandate that, in this citizen’s view, is the 
necessary source of authority for a significant independent policy making role.  It stands to reason 
that such a citizen would prefer methods of statutory interpretation designed entirely to discern 
and to apply the purposes of the elected legislature in fashioning the particular text that it 
enacted.  Approaches to interpretation that conspicuously allow unelec ted officials (whether 
judges or bureaucrats) to vary from the political bargains embodied in statutes would seem 
naturally suspect.   (On the other hand, to the extent unelected officials are faithfully 
implementing the policy preferences of the President, giving agencies interpretive leeway might 
appear to respect plebiscitary democracy in a different way.) 
 
 Another citizen, however, might argue that government rule is legitimate primarily to the 
extent that the interests of all citizens who are affected by government decision making are fairly 
accounted for in the crafting of public policy.  Or, to put the matter differently, our second citizen 
might believe that the legitimacy of government action depends on democratic values in addition 
to electoral accountability – values that courts and perhaps even the agencies themselves are 
better positioned to protect than the elected legislature.  In this citizen’s view, unelected 
bureaucrats and unelected judges may have appropriate roles to play in construing statutes to 
overcome what are deemed to be deficiencies in the legislative process.  These deficiencies may 
include such familiar pathologies as the role of narrow, but well- funded special interests on 
legislative outcomes, or circumstances as unavoidable as the passage of time, which can render 
past legislative bargains obsolete, even if not so disastrous as to mobilize corrective action by the 
legislature itself.  Such obsolescence is particularly likely in the U.S. context, in which 
bicameralism and presentment make it hard er to alter existing statutes than in parliamentary 
systems—an inertia strengthened by the recent prevalence of divided government and the 
routinization of the Senate filibuster. For these reasons, this second citizen might be attracted by 
methods of interpretation that lead an agency or a judge to attend, in the construction of texts, to 
important public values other than fidelity to original legislative intentions. 
 
 The point here is that one’s preference for one or another theory of statutory construction 
is unlikely to rest entirely on ideas about language.  It is likely to rest also on some set of 
normative ideas about the proper institutional roles of Congress, the executive, and the courts. 
 
2. THEORIES OF INTERPRETATION 
 
 There is no one definitive way to catalogue all the approaches to statutory interpretation 

32 
 
 
 
that have evolved over the centuries.  Leading modern scholars of statutory interpretation have, 
however, coalesced around a typology that places different approaches under three general 
headings – theories that aim to discern legislative intent, theories that focus all but exclusively 
on the meaning of text, and so-called dynamic theories, which look to both textual meaning and 
legislative intent, but which are guided at least as conspicuously by some normative conception 
of the judicial role that goes beyond straightforward fidelity to the enacting Congress.  (Of course, 
dynamic interpretation, by focusing less on original legislative intentions, may prove more 
faithful to those who currently inhabit the elected branches of government.) 
 
a. Legislative Intent 
 
RECTOR OF HOLY TRINITY CHURCH V. UNITED STATES 
Supreme Court of the United States, 1892 
143 U.S. 457 
 
 Mr. Justice BREWER delivered the opinion of the court. 
 
 Plaintiff in error is a corporation duly organized and incorporated as a religious society 
under the laws of the state of New York. E. Walpole Warren was, prior to September,  1887, an 
alien residing in England. In that month the plaintiff in error made a contract with him, by which 
he was to remove to the city of New York, and enter into its service as rector and pastor; and, in 
pursuance of such contract, Warren did so remove and enter upon such service. It is claimed by 
the United States that this contra ct on the part of the plaintiff in error was forb idden by [the 
Alien Contract Labor Act of 1885,] chapter 164, 23 [Stat.] 332; and an action was commenced to 
recover the penalty prescribed by that act. The circuit court held that the contract was within the 
prohibition of the statute, and rendered judgment accordingly, and the single question presented 
for our determination is whether it erred in that conclusion. 
 
 The first section describes the act forbidden, and is in these words: 
 
 “Be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives of the United States of America, 
in congress assembled, that from and after the passage of this act it shall be unlawful for any 
person, company, partnership, or corporation, in any manner whatsoever, to prepay the 
transportation, or in any way assist or encourage the importation or migration, of any alien or 
aliens, any for eigner or foreigners, into the United States, its territories, or the District of 
Columbia, under contract or agreement, parol or special, express or implied, made previous to the 
importation or migration of such alien or aliens, foreigner or foreigners, to perform labor or service 
of any kind in the United States, its territories, or the District of Columbia.” 
 
 It must be conceded that the act of the corporation is within the letter of this section, for 
the relation of rector to his church is one of service, and implies labor on the one side with 
compensation on the other. Not only are the general words “labor” and “service” both used, but 
also, as it were to guard against any narrow interpretation and emphasize a breadth of meaning, 
to them is added “of any kind;” and, further, as noticed by the circuit judge in his opinion, the fifth 
section, which makes specif ic exceptions, among them professional actors, artists, lecturers, 
singers, and domestic servants, strengthens the idea that every other kind of labor and service 
was intended to be reached by the first section. While there is great force to this reasoning , we 

33 
 
 
 
cannot think congress intended to denounce with penalties a transaction like that in the present 
case. It is a familiar rule that a thing may be within the letter of the statute and yet not within 
the statute, because not within its spirit nor within the intention of its makers. This has been 
often asserted, and the Reports are full of cases illustrating its application. This is not the 
substitution of the will of the judge for that of the legislator; for frequently words of general 
meaning are used in a st atute, words broad enough to include an act in question, and yet a 
consideration of the whole legislation, or of the circumstances surrounding its enactment, or of 
the absurd results which follow from giving such broad meaning to the words, makes it 
unreasonable to believe that the legislator intended to include the particular act.  As said in 
Stradling v. Morgan, [1 Plow. 199, 205 (K.B. 1560)]: “From which cases it appears that the sages 
of the law heretofore have construed statutes quite contrary to the letter in some appearance, and 
those statutes which comprehend all things in the letter they have expounded to extend to but 
some things, and those which generally prohibit all people from doing such an act they have 
interpreted to permit some people to do it, and those which include every person in the letter they 
have adjudged to reach to some persons only, which expositions have always been founded upon 
the intent of the legislature, which they have collected sometimes by considering the cause and 
necessity of making the act, sometimes by comparing one part of the act with another, and 
sometimes by foreign circumstances.” * * *  
 
 Among other things which may be considered in determining the intent of the legislature 
is the title of the act. We do not mean that it may be used to add to or take  from the body of the 
statute, but it may help to interpret its meaning. * * * 
 
 * * * Now, the title of this act is, “ An act to prohibit the importation and migration of 
foreigners and aliens under contract or agreement to perform labor in the United States, its 
territories, and the District of Columbia.[”] Obviously the thought expressed in this reaches only 
to the work of the manual laborer, as distinguished from that of the professional man. No one 
reading such a title would suppose that congress had in its mind any purpose of staying the 
coming into this country of ministers of th e gospel, or, indeed, of any class whose toil is that of 
the brain. The common understanding of the terms “labor” and “ laborers” does not include 
preaching and preachers, and it is to be assumed that words and phrases are used in their 
ordinary meaning. So whatever of light is thrown upon the statute by the language of the title 
indicates an exclusion from its penal provisions of all contracts for the employment of ministers, 
rectors, and pastors. 
 
 Again, another guide to the meaning of a statute is found in the evil which it is designed 
to remedy; and for this the court properly looks at contemporaneous events, the situation as it 
existed, and as it was pressed upon the attention of the legislative body.   The situation which 
called for this statute was briefly but fully stated by Mr. Justice BROWN when, as district judge, 
he decided the case of  U.S. v. Craig , [28 F. 795, 798 (C.C. E.D. Mich. 1886)] : “The motives and 
history of the act are matters of common knowledge. It had become the practice for large 
capitalists in this country to contract with their agents abroad for the shipment of great numbers 
of an ignorant and servile class of foreign laborers, under contracts by which the employer agreed, 
upon the one hand, to prepay their passage, while, upon the other hand, the laborers agreed to 
work after their arrival for a certain time at a low rate of wages. The effect of this was to break 
down the labor market, and to reduce other laborers engaged in like occupations to the level  of 
the assisted immigrant. The evil finally became so flagrant that an appeal was made to congress 

34 
 
 
 
for relief by the passage of the act in question, the design of which was to raise the standard of 
foreign immigrants, and to discountenance the migration of those who had not sufficient means 
in their own hands, or those of their friends, to pay their passage.”22 
 
 It appears, also, from the petitions [to congress], and in the testimony presented before 
the committees of congress, that it was this cheap, unskilled labor which was making the trouble, 
and the influx of which congress sought to prevent. It was never suggested that we had in this 
country a surplus of brain toilers, and, least of all, that the market for the services of Christian 
ministers was depressed by foreign competition. Those were matters to which the attention of 
congress, or of the people, was not directed. So far, then, as the evil which was sought to be 
remedied interprets the statute, it also guides to an exclusion of this contract from the penalties 
of the act. 
 
 A singular circumstance, throwing light upon the intent of congress, is found in this 
extract from the report of the senate committee on education and labor, recomme nding the 
passage of the bill: “ The general facts and considerations which induce the committee to 
recommend the passage of this bill are set forth in the report of the committee of the house. The 
committee report the bill back without amendment, although there are certain features there of 
which might well be changed or modified, in the hope that the bill may not fail of passage during 
the present session. Especially would the committee have otherwise recommended amendments, 
substituting for the expression, ‘labor and service,’ whenever it occurs in the body of the bill, the 
words ‘manual labor’ or ‘manual service,’ as sufficiently broad to accomplish the purposes of the 
bill, and that such amendments would remove objections which a sharp and perhaps unfriendly 
criticism may urge to the proposed legislation. The committee, however, believing that the bill in 
its present form will be construed as including only those whose labor or service is manual in 
character, and being very desirous that the bill become a law before the adj ournment, have 
reported the bill without  change.” Page 6059, Congressional Record, 48th Cong. And, referring 
back to the report of the committee of the house, there appears this language: “It seeks to restrain 
and prohibit the immigration or importation of laborers who would have never seen our shores 
but for the inducements and allurements of men whose only object is to obtain labor at the lowest 
possible rate, regardless of the social and material well-being of our own citizens, and regardless 
of the evil consequences which result to American laborers from such immigration. This class of 
immigrants care nothing about our institutions, and in many instances never even heard of them. 
They are men whose passage is paid by the importers. They come here under contract to labor for 
a certain number of years. They are ignorant of our  social condition, and, that they may remain 
so, they are isolated and prevented from coming into contact with Americans. They are generally 
from the lowest social stratum, and live upon the coarsest food, and in hovels of a character before 
unknown to American workmen. They, as a rule, do not become citizens, and are certainly not a 
desirable acquisition to the body politic. The inevitable tendency of their presence among us is to 
degrade American labor, and to reduce it to the level of the imported pa uper labor.” Page 5359, 
Congressional Record, 48th Cong. 
 
 We find, therefore, that the title of the act, the evil which was intended to be remedied, 
the circumstances surrounding the appeal to congress, the reports of the committee of each house, 
all concur in affirming that the intent of congress was simply to stay the influx of this cheap, 
 
22 [This passage from United States v. Craig cites no sources. –Ed.]   

35 
 
 
 
unskilled labor. 
 
 But, beyond all these matters, no purpose of action against religion can be imputed to any 
legislation, state or national, because this is a religious people. This is historically true. From the 
discovery of this continent to the present hour, there is a s ingle voice making this affirmation.  
[Quotations followed from several colonial documents, including charters of various colonies.] * * 
*  
 
 * * * [T] he declaration of independence recognizes the presence of the Divine in human 
affairs in these words: “ We hold these truths to be self -evident, that all men are created equal, 
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are 
Life, Liberty, and the pur suit of Happiness.” “ We, therefore, the Representatives of the united 
States of America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world 
for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name and by Authority of the good People of these 
Colonies, solemnly publish and declare,” etc.; “And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm 
reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our 
Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.” 
 
 If we examine the constitutions of the various states, we find in them a constant 
recognition of religious obligations. Every constitution of every one of the 44 states contains 
language which, either directly or by clear implication, recognizes a profound  reverence for 
religion, and an assumption that its influence in all human affairs is essential to the well- being 
of the community. This recognition may be in the preamble, such as is found in the c onstitution 
of Illinois, 1870: “ We, the people of the sta te of Illinois, grateful to Almighty God for the civil, 
political, and religious liberty which He hath so long permitted us to enjoy, and looking to Him 
for a blessing upon our endeavors to secure and transmit the same unimpa ired to succeeding 
generations,” etc.  [Quotations followed from the constitutions of Indiana, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, Mississippi, and Delaware.]  * * *  
 
 Even the constitution of the United States, which is supposed to have little touch upon 
the private life of the individual, contains in the first amendment a declaration common to the 
constitutions of all the states, as follows: “ Congress shall make no law respecting an 
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,”  etc.,—and also provides in 
article 1, § 7, (a provision common to many constitutions,) that the executive shall have 10 days 
(Sundays excepted) within which to determine whether he will approve or veto a bill. 
 
 There is no dissonance in these declarations. There is a universal language pervading 
them all, having one meaning. They affirm and reaffirm that this is a religious nation. These are 
not individual sayings, declarations of private persons. They are organic utterances. They speak 
the voice of the entire people. While because of a general recognition of this truth the question 
has seldom been presented to the courts, yet we find that in Updegraph v. Com., [11 Serg. & 
Rawle 394, 400 (Pa. 1824)], it was decided that, “Christianity, general Christianity, is, and always 
has been, a part of the common law of Pennsylvania; * * * not Christianity with an established 
church and tithes and spiritual courts, but Christianity with liberty of conscience to all men.” * * 
* And in the famous case of  Vidal v. Girard's Ex'rs , 2 How. 127  [43 U.S. 127, 198 (1844)], this 
court, while sustaining the will of Mr. Girard, with its provision for the creation of a college into 
which no minister should be  permitted to enter, observed:  “It is also said, and truly, that the 

36 
 
 
 
Christian religion is a part of the common law of Pennsylvania.” 
 
 If we pass beyond these matters to a view of American life, as expressed by its laws, its 
business, its customs, and its society, we find every where a clear recognition of the same truth. 
Among other matters note the following: The form of oath universally prevailing, concluding with 
an appeal to the Almighty; the custom of opening sessions of all deliberative bodies and most 
conventions with prayer; the prefatory words of all wills, “In the name of God, amen;” the laws 
respecting the observance of the Sabbath, with the general cessation of all secular business, and 
the closing of courts, legislatures, and other similar public assemblies on that day; the churches 
and church organizations which abound in every city, town, and hamlet; the multitude of 
charitable organizations existing every where under Christian auspices; the gigantic missionary 
associations, with general support, and aiming to establish Christian missions in every quarter 
of the globe. These, and many other matters which might be noticed, ad d a volume of unofficial 
declarations to the mass of organic utterances that this is a Christian nation. In the face of all 
these, shall it be believed that a congress of the United States intended to make it a misdemeanor 
for a church of this country to contract for the services of a Christian minister residing in another 
nation? 
 
 Suppose, in the congress that passed this act, some member had offered a bill which in 
terms declared that, if any Roman Catholic church in this country should contract with Cardinal 
Manning to come to this country, and enter into its service as pastor and priest, or any Episcopal 
church should enter into a like contract with Canon Farrar, or any Baptist church should make 
similar arrangements with Rev. Mr. Spurgeon, or any Jewish synagogue with some eminent 
rabbi, such contract should be adjudged unlawful and void, and the church making it be subject 
to prosecution and punishment.  Can it be believed that it would have received a minute of 
approving thought or a single vote? Yet it is contended that such was, in effect, the meaning of 
this statute. The construction invoked cannot be accepted as correct. It is a case where there was 
presented a definite evil, in view of which the legislature used general terms with the purpose of 
reaching all phases of that evil; and thereafter, unexpectedly, it is developed that the general 
language thus employed is broad enough to reach cases and acts which the whole history and life 
of the country affirm could not have been intentionally legislated against. It is the duty of the 
courts, under those circumstances, to say tha t, however broad the language of the statute may 
be, the act, although within the letter, is not within the intention of the legislature, and therefore 
cannot be within the statute. 
 
 The judgment will be reversed, and the case remanded for further proceedings in 
accordance with this opinion. 
 
NOTES 
 
 1. Discerning Legislative Intent in Holy Trinity and Beyond. As noted by three prominent 
legislation scholars, “Anglo -American theories of statutory interpretation have traditionally 
emphasized legislative intent as the object or goal of statutory interpretation.”  W ILLIAM N. 
ESKRIDGE, JR., PHILIP P. FRICKEY, AND ELIZABETH GARRETT, LEGISLATION AND STATUTORY 
INTERPRETATION 221 (2d ed. 2006).  Because legislation is a kind of purposive communicative act, 
it makes intuitive sense that a statute ought to be applied in a way that fulfills its authors’ 
purposes. 

37 
 
 
 
 
 The notorious problem here, of course, is that the idea of legislative intent is highly 
ambiguous.  In seeking legislative intent, courts sometimes speak as if they are seeking a specific 
intention that motivated a particular legislative enactment.  Perha ps the most celebrated 
example of this approach is Holy Trinity, excerpted above.  In holding that the statute did not 
prohibit a church from pre-paying for the ocean voyage of an English cleric hired to be its pastor, 
the Court cites the ordinary meaning of the word “labor,” events surrounding enactment of the 
law, and aspects of the statute’s legislative history to conclude that Congress specifically intended 
to preclude only the importation of manual labor.   
 
 It is questionable, however, whether this intention could be persuasively attributed to 
enough members of the House and Senate to make it a reasonable judgment of what majorities 
of both chambers consciously had in mind.  The law contained some specific exemptions; “pastors” 
was not among them.  In addition, recent scholarship has turned up floor deliberations on the 
Alien Contract Labor Act that were not cited by Justice Brewer and seem to go against the history 
that he constructed on the basis of the committee reports, e.g., the Senate floor manager suggested 
that the bill as written applied to professionals and so “[p]erhaps * * * ought to be further 
amended,” which it was not. A DRIAN VERMEULE, JUDGING UNDER UNCERTAINTY: AN 
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF LEGAL INTERPRETATION 93-98 (2006). These doubts highlight the 
difficulties of a “specific intent” approach to statutory interpretation:  the often debatable basis 
upon which intentions are attributed to legislators, and the difficulties in aggregating individual 
preferences into a persuasive understanding of group intention. 
 
 Because of the difficulties of actually attributing specific intentions to collective groups, 
courts have taken other approaches to discerning legislative intent.  One is traditionally called 
“imaginative reconstruction.”  Its aim is to imagine what the en acting body likely would have 
intended on the point in question, given what is known about the law actually enacted.  Holy 
Trinity took this tack, as well.  It argued famously (or infamously) that “no purpose of action 
against religion can be imputed to any legislation, state or national, because this is a religious 
people. This is historically true. From the discovery of this continent to the present hour, there is 
a single voice making this affirmation. . . .[T]his is a Christian nation.”  On this basis, the Court 
essentially concluded that Congress, had it been explicitly confronted with the permissibility of 
importing pastors, would have intended to exempt them from the law’s reach.  This imaginative 
reconstruction of legislative intent, of course, seems to be based more on the imagination of judges 
than any evidence of legislator sentiment.  And, of course, to the extent imaginative 
reconstruction depends on legislator sentiment, it faces the same problems of aggregation and 
attribution mentioned above with regard to specific intent. 
 
 Yet a third approach to legislative intent is called “purposivism.”  Its focus is not on 
conscious legislator intent, but rather on a more general sense of a statute’s goals or purposes.  
Holy Trinity shows elements of this approach, as well, in concluding that the purpose of the Alien 
Contract Labor Act was to prevent the importation of manual labor as a way of preventing the 
undercutting of hourly wages.  The key advantage of this approach is that, in seeking a coherent 
understanding of a statute’s goals, the method is more adaptable to changing circumstances and 
unforeseen issues.  The difficulty is that statutory purposes are typically multiple and often in 
tension with one another.  In enacting the National Industrial Recovery Act in the 1930s, for 
example, Congress explicitly embraced both the goal of “conserv[ing] natural resources” and the 

38 
 
 
 
goal of “promot[ing] the fullest possible utilization of the present productive capacity of 
industries.”  Reconciling those purposes in particular contexts would undoubtedly require 
determinations of policy that the statutory text cannot dictate.  In other  words, using genera l 
statutory purposes to reach determinate answers to particular quandaries may well call for 
judgments of context and policy that clearly implicate the interpreter’s perspective as much as, if 
not more than, the perspective of the original legislators. 
 
 2. Legislative Intent and Agency Enforcement Discretion. Why would federal prosecutors 
opt to bring a case against a church? Politically, a church is about as sympathetic a defendant as 
one can imagine, especially if its offense is simply hiring a minister. It is common for legislators 
to employ relatively broad language while implicitly rely ing upon governmental enforcers (who, 
at least in America, tend to be politically sensitive actors) to use their discretion not  to enforce 
the law in ways that wi ll seem excessive and cause political trouble. In this case, that dynamic 
broke down, and in that respect, Holy Trinity is extraordinary. As recent scholarship indicates, 
the prosecution was brought by a U.S. Attorney who opposed immigration restriction as a policy 
matter and brought the church prosecution as a stunt to bring the Alien Contract Labor Act into 
disrepute, even making apparently facetious arguments about the need to protect American 
clergymen from foreign competition . Carol Chomsky, Unlocking the M ysteries of Holy Trinity: 
Spirit, Letter, and History in Statutory Interpretation, 100 COLUM. L. REV. 901 (2000). 
 
b. Textualism  
 
 Given the difficulties of searching for legislative purpose, a number of judges and scholars 
have in recent decades promoted a school of statutory interpretation that purports to rely more 
exclusively on the actual words a legislature uses. Indeed, a vener able rule of statutory 
construction states that, where the words of a statute have a “plain meaning,” that meaning ought 
to prevail in applying the statute.  This approach has appeal on a number of grounds.  First, 
because the text of a federal statute is what majorities in both the House and Senate voted on, its 
plain meaning –  if there is one –  would seem to be the most reliable indicator of their intent.  
Further, the text is also the source of statutory meaning that the public most often encounters  
and can most easily access, so that giving weight to its plain meaning honors the value s of fair 
notice and adherence to the rule of law. 
 
 Justice Scalia has famously gone beyond the “plain meaning rule” to argue that statutory 
text forms the only legitimate focus for statutory interpretation.  His approach has been called 
“the new textualism.”  Going beyond the points already mentioned, he argues – because only the 
statutory text traverses the constitutionally prescribed process for enacting law –  that only 
statutory text can legitimately be a source of law.  Furthermore, he has urged that purposive 
approaches to interpretation give judges too much interpretive leeway – Holy Trinity is “nothing 
but an invitation to judicial lawmaking” –  and that textualism properly reduces the exercise of 
policy making discretion by the judiciary.   A NTONIN SCALIA AND AMY GUTMANN, A MATTER OF 
INTERPRETATION: FEDERAL COURTS AND THE LAW (1998).  See also Frank H. Easterbrook, Text, 
History and Structure in Statutory Interpretation, 17 HARV. J. L. & PUB. POL.  61 (1994);  John F. 
Manning, Textualism and the Equity of the Statute, 101 COLUM. L. REV. 1 (2001). 
 
 The idea that textualism limits judicial discretion has been heatedly challenged, however.  
Textualist judges no less than purposivist judges seem frequently to find their way to statutory 

39 
 
 
 
readings that cohere with the judges’ presumed policy preferences.  Resorting to legislative 
history in search for legislative intention may actually reduce the range of plausible answers to 
questions of statutory construction.  Jerry L. Mashaw, Textualism, Constitutionalism, and the 
Interpretation of Federal Statutes, 32 WM. & MARY L. REV. 827, 836 (1991).  Moreover, empirical 
analysis has demonstrated that Congress more often overrides textualist interpretations of its 
handiwork than judicial interpretations rooted in more purposivist approaches, e.g., William N. 
Eskridge, Jr., Overriding Supreme Court Statutory Interpretation Decisions, 101 Y ALE L.J. 331 
(1991).  This certainly calls into question whether textualism more faithfully respects Congress’s 
law-making primacy than do purposive approaches. 
 
c. Dynamic Statutory Interpretation 
 
 Yet a third set of approaches to statutory interpretation centers less exclusively on 
statutory text or even on legislative history, and would give judges and lawyers more room to 
attend to contemporary public values in the process of statutory construction.  Professor William 
Eskridge, the most prominent proponent of this ap proach, calls it “dynamic statutory 
interpretation.”  It accepts the premise that courts are agents of the legislature in implementing 
statutes, but asserts that the right analogy for the court is that of a “relational agent” –  that is, 
an agent charged wi th carrying out its principal’s specific orders and general goals over an 
extended period of time.  Such an agent may need to be creative in figuring out how best to 
accomplish a legislature’s goals in a world very different from the world in which a statute was 
enacted. 
 
 A good example where this might make a difference is a state case, Commonwealth v. 
Welosky, 276 Mass. 398 (1931), which held that women were excluded from jury service in 
Massachusetts.  The relevant statute, enacted during the nineteenth century, provided: “A person 
qualified to vote for representatives to the [state legislature] shall be liab le to serve as a juror.”  
When the statute was written, women in Massachusetts could not vote, and the court concluded 
that the specific intent of the legislature ha d been to involve only men in jury service.  A plain 
meaning approach would, of course, have yielded a contrary result in 1931 because women, in 
1931, could vote in Massachusetts.  But so, presumably, would have a more dynamic approach 
that would give weight to the vast changes that had occurred in the civic role of women in the 
course of intervening decades.  In other words, faced with the question whether to interpret 
“person[s] qualified to vote” according to its 19 th or 20 th century meanings, a judge mi ght 
determine that, in light of the Nineteenth Amendment enfranchising women, the original 
legislature might want its handiwork updated to reflect a current national consensus as to 
women’s political role.  Indeed, a judge might so decide even if the statute read, “Men qualified to 
vote . . . .”  Values might trump text. 
 
 The obvious advantage of a dynamic approach to interpretation is that it helps to avoid 
statutory obsolescence.  The difficulties it poses, of course, deal with the potential for 
unpredictability and what some citizens would undoubtedly regard as excessiv e judicial policy 
making. 
 
 The administrative law cases excerpted in the casebook  exhibit all of these approaches, 
which is hardly surprising given the changing membership of the U.S. Supreme Court and the 
U.S. Courts of Appeals.  But even an individual judge is quite likely to take different approaches 

40 
 
 
 
to statutory interpretation in different cases.  Although such variability may raise questions 
about the scope of judicial discretion, it may also signify an appropriately pragmatic adaptation 
to the seemingly infinite variety of practical challenges posed  by questions of statutory 
interpretation.  That is, as with the administrative process itself, processes of statutory 
interpretation may themselves serve multiple purposes, which are sometimes in tension – 
bolstering electoral accountability, achieving transparency and predictability in the law, pursuing 
coherence in legal development, and keeping the law faithful to important public values.  As 
judges perceive contending values coming into play in particular cases, they may weigh those 
values differently depending on matters of factual and legal context that are not always easy to 
specify in advance. 
 
3.  SOURCES OF INTERPRETIVE EVIDENCE 
 
 As vigorous as are contemporary arguments over interpretive theory, so, too, are debates 
over the appropriate sources of statutory meaning.   
 
a. Text  
 
 In deciding to construe a particular statutory phrase, lawyers and judges will typically 
attend not only to the language of the clause in question, but also to the text and structure of the 
statute as a whole.  For at least two reasons, courts frequently look as well to statutes on the 
same or related subjects.  First, courts generally entertain a presumption against statutory repeal 
by implication.  Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC v. Billing, 551 U.S. 2 64 (2007).  Thus, if a 
statute is susceptible to tw o interpretations, one of which would implicitly override another 
statute, that conflict gives rise to a strong presumption that the non-conflictual interpretation is 
preferable.  Second, when a statute is ambiguous, courts frequently cite a presumption that 
statutes on the same subject (“in pari materia ”) should be read in harmony with one another.   
E.g., Carlsbad Technology, Inc. v. HIF Bio, Inc., 556 U.S. 635 (2009) (statutory provision limiting 
appellate review of federal remand orders to state courts m ust be read in pari materia with 
statutory provision specifying grounds for remand, so that bar on appellate review of remand 
orders is limited to those based on a ground mentioned in the latter statute). 
 
b. Extrinsic Sources 
 
 It is also common for courts to look beyond statutory texts to discern the meaning of 
ambiguous statutory phrasing.  One source may be the relevant common law that pertained to 
the subject in question prior to enactment of the ambiguous statute.  Though often challenged 
(and many times rejected), it has been a venerable rule of statutory construction that statutes “in 
derogation of the common law” should be narrowly construed.  Another source may be 
contemporary dictionaries, which a judge may use to shed light on what likely was conventional 
understanding of a word or phrase when adopted by a legislature. 
 
 An extrinsic source that is frequently used, but subject to much controversy,  is the 
statute’s legislative history.  As we explained in the preceding Section, the process of enactment 
yields a series of documents pertaining to the statute’s meaning: (a) the serial versions of the bill, 
including amendments accepted and rejected; (b)  House and Senate committee proceedings on 
the bill, such as hearings and marku ps; (c)  House and Senate committee reports; (d) general 

41 
 
 
 
debate and amendment activity on the House and Senate floor, especially remarks of the floor 
managers; and (e) the conference committee’s joint explanatory statement.  Federal courts have 
permitted the use of these kinds of documents in statutory interpret ation since the late 1800s  
(Holy Trinity  being the leading case for their admissibility) , though the routine use of such 
material began only with the New Deal.  Nicholas R. Parrillo, Leviathan and Interpretive 
Revolution: The Administrative State, the Judiciary, and the Rise of Legislative History , 1890-
1950, 123 Y ALE L.J. 266 (2013).  Judicial reliance on legislative history reached a peak in the 
1970s and 1980s and has since declined.  David S. Law & David Zaring, Law Versus Ideology: The 
Supreme Court and the Use of Legislative History, 51 WM. & MARY L. REV. 1653, 1716 (2010).  But 
it has not disappeared.  Of the members of the Supreme Court, only Justice Scalia professes to 
ignore legislative history categorically; the others are willing to consider it, though with more 
skepticism and less enthusiasm than was exhibited by their predecessors thirty years ago.  John 
David Ohlendorf, Textualism and Obstacle Preemption, 47 GA. L. REV. 369, 371-72 (2012) (citing 
cases in 2010-12).  Litigators must therefore continue to be conversant with such material.   
 
 A major reason that the judiciary has become increasingly wary of legislative history is 
that many judges are sympathetic to the critiques leveled by the textualist movement.  The most 
basic of these critiques is that legislative history, unlike statutory text, has not been voted on by 
the two chambers of Congress or presented to the President in accordance with Article  I, 
Section 7, so it is not “law” under the Constitution.  But this critique may be a misreading of the 
view of legislative history’s defenders, who generally think such material provides helpful context 
for the text and therefore may resolve ambiguities therein, not that legislative history itself is 
“law.”  If textualists  are comfortable using materials like dictionaries to sort out statutory 
meaning, e.g., MCI Telecommunications v. A.T. & T., 512 U.S. 218 (1994), it is difficult to see why 
committee reports, floor debates or even contemporary news accounts are categorically off limits 
in divining legislative intent.   
 
 Textualists also criticize legislative history on the ground that it is not drafted (or even 
read) by members of Congress themselves, but instead by staffers or lobbyists.  E.g., Blanchard 
v. Bergeron, 487 U.S. 87, 98-99 (1989) (Scalia, J. concurring).  Yet, as we noted earlier (at pages 
28-31), members themselves do not draft (or necessarily read) statutory text either.  Legislative 
history and statutory text tend to be drafted by different congressional employees (the former by 
partisan committee staff, the latter by nonpartisan Legislative Counsel), but that is only a 
tendency: there are no rules that say who may draft which type of source, or to prevent lobbyists 
from drafting either type.  It does appear that partisan committee staff and Legislative Counsel 
have different kinds of relationships to their congressional bosses (the former based on partisan 
loyalty and at-will employment, the latter on lawyer-client fiduciary duty) and different kinds of 
expertise (the former in policy, the latter in drafting technique).  Abbe R. Gluck & Lisa Schultz 
Bressman, Statutory Interpretation from the Inside —An Empirical Study of Congressional 
Drafting, Delegation, and the Canons: Part I, 65 STAN. L. REV. 901, 967-69 (2013).  It is not clear 
that these differences mean that one group’s product is systematically superior to the other’s as 
an interpretive source.   
 
 The textualist point that statutory text (unlike legislative history) goes through the 
Article I, Section 7 process can be restated in functionalist terms: words can become statutory 
text only if approved by majorities of both chambers, but words can beco me legislative history 
much more easily, for they need only be approved (or spoken) by an individual m ember or by a 

42 
 
 
 
small group of members: a bill or amendment is the responsibility of its sponsor; an utterance at 
a hearing, of whoever happens to be speaking; a committee report, of the majority of the reporting 
committee; a floor statement, of the individual speaker; and a joint explanatory statement, of the 
majority of the conference.  In the view of textualists, the authorship of each document of 
legislative history by one (or a few) members means that no such document can be taken to reflect 
the intent of the enacting body.   
 
 To be sure, it is conventional for judges, when using legislative history, to rely especially 
on committee reports, statements of committee -designated floor managers, and conference 
reports—that is, utterances of actors to whom the chamber has delegated power, or on whom the 
chamber customarily relies.  But do the utterances of committees and floor managers merit this 
privileged interpretive status?  Your answer may depend on which of the two alternative images 
of committees (discussed above at pages 8-11) you think is more accurate: Are committees faithful 
agents of the chamber majority or are they dominated by “preference outliers” who self-select onto 
their respective committees because their constituents have an interest that is more concentrated 
than, and opposed to, the national interest?  If committees are preference outliers, then relying 
upon the legislative history they produce is perverse.  John F. Manning, Textualism as a 
Nondelegation Doctrine, 97 C OLUM. L. REV. 673, 718- 19 (1997).  Some observers suggest that 
judges, when evaluating each piece of legislative history, should weigh it according to whether 
the speaker (e.g., the committee chair) had an incentive to state faithfully the views of the 
enacting coalit ion, taking into account the speaker’s institutional position and the politics 
surrounding the statute.  Matthew D. McCubbins, Roger G. Noll, & Barry R. Weingast, Legislative 
Intent: The Use of Positive Theory in Statutory Interpretation, 57 L. & CONTEMP. PROBS. 3 (1994).  
Others think that congressional operations are too complex and opaque for judges to make these 
kinds of evaluations.  J ERRY L. MASHAW, GREED, CHAOS, AND GOVERNANCE: USING PUBLIC 
CHOICE TO IMPROVE PUBLIC LAW 96-101 (1997).   
 
 Because legislators, whether individually or in small groups, can unilaterally insert their 
words into a statute’s legislative record, that record is likely to contain disparate and even 
contradictory statements of meaning—probably more likely than is the statute’s text, since words 
get into the text only if they clear the high bar of a majority vote of both chambers.  The 
heterogeneity of legislative history relative to statutory text arguably renders legislative history 
less coherent, more confusing, mor e costly to research and evaluate, and more susceptible to 
biased and opportunistic interpretation.  ADRIAN VERMEULE, JUDGING UNDER UNCERTAINTY: AN 
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF LEGAL INTERPRETATION 112-14 (2006).  But see Victoria F. Nourse, A 
Decision Theory of Statutory Interpretation: Legislative History by the Rules, 122 YALE L.J. 70 
(2012) (arguing that attention to text and to congressional procedure and organization can help 
judges identify the most telling pieces of legislative history and thereby greatly mitigate the 
heterogeneity problem).   
 
 Notably, however, administrative agencies seem better positioned to meet this challenge 
than almost any other kinds of litigants, for agencies are so deeply and regularly involved in the 
legislative process that they know the discourse better than almost anyone.  Peter L. Strauss, 
When the Judge Is Not the Primary Official with Responsibility to Read: Agency Interpretation 
and the Problem of Legislative History , 66 C HI.-KENT L. REV. 321 (1990).  Historically, it was 
agencies that first provided legislative history to the courts on a wholesale basis.  Parrillo, supra.  
To some, the advantage enjoyed by agencies (and big law firms) in researching legislative history 

43 
 
 
 
makes it unfair for courts to rely upon it.  E.g., Robert H. Jackson, The Meaning of Statutes: What 
Congress Says or What the Courts Say, 34 A.B.A.J. 535, 538 (1948) (warning that judicial reliance 
on legislative history puts “knowledge of the law practically out of reach of all except the 
Government and a few law offices”).  To others, agencies’ intimacy with legislative history —and 
congressional overseers’ frequent use of such documents to provide directives to agencies—
counsels in favor of judges using it, since doing so will better align judicial decisions with a source 
that legislators intend for agencies (the primary implementers of statutes) to follow.  Robert A. 
Katzmann, Madison Lecture: Statutes, 87 N.Y.U. L. REV. 637, 656-61 (2012).   
 
 Besides legislative history,  other extrinsic sources may be available if, as if often the case, 
the question of statutory interpretation now facing a lawyer or judge is not a matter of first 
impression.  For example, even if a statute might be viewed at first glance as ambiguous, its  
interpretation in an earlier judicial opinion may well be deemed binding on a court or agency later 
in time.  Indeed, the judicial practice of stare decisis –  following precedents unless formally 
overruled – is especially strong in statutory cases because of the presumption that Congress could 
always have overridden a judicial statutory interpretation if the earlier court got it wrong.  See, 
e.g., Floyd v. Kuhn, 407 U.S. 258 (1972) (reaffirming precedents construing major league baseball 
to be beyond the scope of the Sherman Antitrust Act).  Likewise, as discussed in Chapter 7 of the 
Casebook, courts will frequently defer to administrative interpretations of statutes if an agency 
got there first, as it were.  There is also a rule, not always followed, that treats an executive 
branch interpretation of statutory language as authoritative if Congress reenacted the statutory 
language in question after being apprised of the executive branch view.  See cases cited in William 
Eskridge, Jr., Interpreting Legislative Inaction, 87 MICH. L. REV. 67 (1988). 
 
 The debate over theories of interpretation does not map neatly onto debates over sources 
of interpretive evidence.  Textualists, of course, will likely eschew legislative history, but followers 
of purposivism or dynamic interpretation may still disagree about which sources of evidence are 
weightiest both in general and in specific cases. 
 
4. CANONS OF INTERPRETATION 
 
 In addition to the different sources of interpretive material mentioned above, lawyers and 
judges have available yet another set of interpretive tools.  These are so -called “canons of 
construction,” which are “principles or presumptions that judges [and lawyers] use to discern – 
or, at times, to construct – statutory meaning.”  JOHN F. MANNING AND MATTHEW C. STEPHENSON, 
LEGISLATION AND REGULATION 219 (2010).  Some of these canons are simply generalizations about 
the use of language, and purport to function only as rules of thumb for decoding English text.  
Others, however, are avowedly based on substantive values, not semantic understanding.  For 
example, the “rule of lenity” holds that ambiguities in criminal statutes are to be construed 
favorably to defendants.  A variety of constitutional values may be cited in support of the rule – 
the value to due process, for example, of not imposing criminal liability on anyone without the 
clearest possible statement of the law.  But the rule is not a mere decoding of language.  It brings 
into the process of statutory interpretation values that are grounded in sources outside the statute 
itself. 
 
 The semantic canons of interpretation have a common- sense feel, although they may in 
fact rest on debatable theories of language or dubious assumptions about legislative drafting skill.  

44 
 
 
 
Among the most commonly cited are these: 
 
• “Expressio unius est exclusio alterius” holds that the mention of one thing in a statute 
precludes the inclusion of another.   See, e.g., Arizona v. United States,  132 S.Ct. 2492 (2012) 
(Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (arguing that federal law expressly 
preempting state laws that punish “those who employ” undocumented aliens should be read to 
imply a lack of pre -emption for other state laws, including laws punishing “those who seek or 
accept employment”). 
 
• The “noscitur a sociis” (“known by its associates”) canon holds that an ambiguous term is 
presumed to be of the same kind as terms that surround it.  Thus, if a statute refers to “wrestlers, 
boxers, and fencers,” we assume “boxers” refers to pugilists, not canines or a kind of underwear.  
See, e.g., Freeman v. Quicken Loans, Inc., 132 S.Ct. 2034 (2012) (term “percentage” in statutory 
bar to accepting “any portion, split, or percentage of any charge made or received for the rendering 
of a real estate settlement service,” should be understood, like the words “portion” and “split,” to 
mean “less than the whole,” that is, not 100 per cent). 
 
• The “ejusdem generis” (“of the same kind”) canon holds that when general terms in a 
statute follow a series of specific terms, the general terms are presumed to include only others 
within the same category exemplified by the specific term.  Thus, if a sta tute refers to 
“automobiles, trucks, wagons, and motorcycles, and any other vehicle,” “vehicle” may properly be 
understood to refer only to forms of ground transportation and not airplanes.  McBoyle v. United 
States, 283 U.S. 25 (1931). 
 
• The “presumption of consistent meaning,” albeit frequently overcome, holds that, when a 
word appears on multiple occasions in a single statute, it is generally understood to have the same 
meaning throughout.  But see, e.g., General Dynamics Land Systems, Inc. v. Cline, 540 U.S. 621 
(2004) (concluding that “age,” in the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, sometimes means 
chronological age and sometimes means “old age”). 
 
• The “presumption against surplus language” holds that, where possible, statutes should 
be read to render all words and phrases as independently meaningful.  (It is hard to believe the 
originator of this canon ever met an actual lawyer.)  See Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of 
Communities for a Great Oregon , 515 U.S. 687 (1995) (approving interpretation of “harm” to 
species proscribed by the Endangered Species Act as including general degradation of habitat, 
not just intentional acts that directly kill or injure wildlife, which are proscribed by other words 
in the statute). 
 
 Various cases also cite rules of thumb as to grammar and usage, and, somewhat 
controversially, the proposition that statutes ought to be read to avoid absurd results.  The 
absurdity avoidance canon is debatable because the line may be blurry between “absurd” results 
and results that appear simply to be unreasonable.  Thus, for example, although Justice Scalia 
has conceded the appropriateness of the presumption against absurdity, at least in narrow 
circumstances, other s cholars believe the presumption underm ines the premises of textualism 
and amounts to inappropriate recourse to a judge’s intuition as to a statute’s likeliest purposes.   
John F. Manning, The Absurdity Doctrine, 116 HARV. L. REV. 2387 (2003). 
 

45 
 
 
 
 In addition to the rule of lenity, two other substantive canons are perhaps of greatest 
importance in public law cases.  One is the so-called constitutional avoidance canon.  It holds that, 
where one of two reasonably competing statutory interpretations w ould raise serious questions 
as to the constitutionality of the statute, the other interpretation is favored.  In some cases, the 
Court has split on the proper implementation of the canon – either because the dissenters believe 
the Court has used the avoidance canon to effectively rewrite an unambiguous statute, e.g., NLRB 
v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago, 440 U.S. 490 (1979) or because the dissenters believe the Court has 
unjustifiably failed to deploy the canon because the majority is excessively eager to resolve the 
constitutional question that one interpretation poses, e.g., Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991).  
The canon is rooted, however, in the Court’s long -standing view that it should avoid the 
unnecessary resolution of constitutional questions because the potential for interference in the 
work of the elected branches and the difficulty of “correcting” erroneous constitutional judgments 
make the Court’s constitutional review role especially sensitive. 
 
 The second is really a pair of presumptions in support of federalism.  The Court has long 
held, on one hand, that federal preemption of state law in areas of traditional state concern is not 
to be inferred unless preemption was “the clear and manifest purpose of Congress.”  Rice v. Santa 
Fe Elevator Corporation , 331 U.S. 218 (1947).  The Court more recently extended this 
presumption into a so-called plain statement requirement.  The Court held in Gregory v. Ashcroft, 
501 U.S. 452 (1991), that a federal sta tute should not be read to alter the “usual constitutional 
balance” between state and federal powers, unless Congress makes its intent “unmistakably clear 
in the language of the statute.”  In Gregory, the Court relied on that presumption to exempt state 
judges from a federal ban on mandatory retirement rules. 
 
 A significant debate exists over the utility of the canons in bringing order or greater 
objectivity to the resolution of statutory interpretation questions.  Karl Llewellyn famously 
suggested that no statutory interpretation could be persuasively grounded on the canons without 
more because “there are two opposing canons on almost every point.”  Karl N. Llewellyn, Remarks 
on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules of Canons About How Statutes Are to Be 
Construed, 3 VAND. L. REV. 395, 401 (1950).  Others defend the canons’ utility in guiding 
interpretation, at least on the ground that “[t]he canons present no greater opportunity for 
judicial willfulness than do other techniques of statutory interpretation . . . .”  Jonathan R. Macey 
& Geoffrey P. Miller, The Canons of Statutory Construction and Judicial Preference, 45 VAND. L. 
REV. 647, 650 (1992).  In any event, there is empirical evidence that the canons have become more 
popular on the Supreme Court in recent years, and some scholars have objected to their use in 
derogation of a more careful search for legislative intent as the p rimary guide to interpretation. 
James J. Brudney &  Corey Ditslear, Canons of Construction and the Elusive Quest for Neutral 
Reasoning, 58 VAND. L. REV. 1, 7 (2005). 
 
5.  ALLOCATING INTERPRETIVE AUTHORITY 
 
 In administrative law, the foregoing questions about how to interpret statutes are closely 
intertwined with difficult issues also about who gets to do so – issues, that is, about the allocation 
of authority between the executive and judicial branches for saying what statutes mean.  Agency 
interpretations of statutory law are frequently challenged in court, inevitably posing the question 
whether courts owe agencies any deference in reviewing their statutory interpretations.  On one 
hand, it is, as the Supreme Court so famously asserted in Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 

46 
 
 
 
137, 177 (1803), “emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the 
law is.”  A lack of serious judicial scrutiny of agency legal interpretation would pose an obvious 
threat to rule of law values.  On the other hand, in drafting  a statute empowering an agency to 
perform some public function, Congress has chosen the executive branch – not the judiciary – to 
act as its agent.  Too intensive a judicial second -guessing of agency interpretation could 
undermine the agency’s role as primary policy maker in the implementation of statutes and 
negate the value of its typically greater domain expertise.  The surrounding issues are  explored 
in some depth in Chapter 7 of the Casebook.   
 
 Of course, given the institutionally distinct roles of courts and agencies in relation to the 
implementation of statutes, it might be considered not only permissible but normatively 
appropriate for agencies and courts to take quite different approaches to statutory interpretation. 
If so, sorting out the problem of appropriate deference becomes that much more complex. See, 
Jerry L. Mashaw, Between Facts and Norms: Agency Statutory Interpretation as an Autonomous 
Enterprise, 55 U. TOR. L. J. 497 (2005).  As you encounter agency interpretations of statutory law 
in the Casebook, it will deepen your understanding of how agencies work and of the relationship 
between agencies and the legislative and judicial branches to consider how the agency likely 
developed its interpretation – both procedurally and analytically –  and to what ex tent, and for 
what reasons, the reviewing court is or is not giving weight to the agency’s reading.  Do reviewing 
courts seem to you to be approaching questions of  statutory interpretation in ways you find 
predictable?  Persuasive?  Mindful of what you take to be an appropriate balance of powers among 
the three branches?  These questions are utterly central to the subject of administrative law. 