Paralyzed Veterans of America v. D.C. Arena L.P. — 117 F.3d 579 (D.C. Cir. 1997) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/743059.pdf

PARALYZED VETERANS OF AMER­
ICA, et al., Appellees/Cross-Appel­
lants
v.
D.C. ARENA L.P., A District of Columbia
Limited Partnership, et al.,
Appellants/Cross-Appellees
Nos. 97-7005, 97-7017.
United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.
Argued May 9, 1997.
Decided July 1, 1997.
579
­
­


n

e
­
-­
y
e

t

h­
at
l
al
n
e

d
e
.


or

f-

580































Kester, DC,
John G. Washington, argued
the cause for appellants, with whom Brendan
V. Sullivan, Jr., Paul Mogin, and Thomas G.
Hentoff were on the briefs.
NiM Kuckes, Washington, DC, argued the
cause for appellees, with whom William H.
Jeffress, Jr., David S. Cohen, and Lawrence
B. Hagel were on the briefs.
Samuel R. Bagenstos, Attorney, United
States Department of Justice, Washington,
DC, argued the cause and filed the brief for
amicus curiae the Unites States.

Before EDWARDS, Chief Judge,
SILBERMAN and SENTELLE, Circuit
Judges.

Opinionfor the Court filed by Circuit
Judge SILBERMAN.
SILBERMAN, Circuit Judge:
Appellees/cross-appellants (appellees) sued
appellants/cross-appellees (appellants) to re-
quire that the wheelchair seating in an arena
under construction provide lines of sight over
standing spectators. The district court con-
cluded that most, but not all, of the wheel-
chair seating must have such sightlines. We
affirm.

I.
Appellants own and will operate the MCI
Center, an arena currently under construc-
tion in downtown Washington, D.C. It will
house the NBA’s Washington Wizards and
the NHL’s Washington Capitals, and will
host concerts and other special events. One
aspect of the design of any arena is the
choice of the “seating bowls,” a selection that
determines what seats will be offered for sale
at what events. Because the games and
events will be exciting affairs and the patrons
are expected, even encouraged at times, to
stand and cheer for the home teams, wheel-
chair users are understandably concerned
about whether the seats available to them
will allow them to see the action during the
most dramatic moments.
The case arises under Title III of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 12181 et seq. (1994). The general rule of
Title III provides:
No individual shall be discriminated
against on the basis of disability in the full
and equal enjoyment of the goods, ser-
vices, facilities, privileges, advantages, or
accommodations of any place of public ac-
commodation by any person who owns,
leases (or leases to), or operates a place of
public accommodation.
Id. § 12182(a). Newly constructed facilities
subject to the ADA must be “readily accessi-
ble to and usable by individuals with disabili-
ties.” Id. § 12183(a)(1). Congress has di-
rected the Department of Justice to flesh out
these general principles by “issu[ing] regula-
tions ... that include standards applicable to
facilities” covered by Title III. Id.
§ 12186(b). One of these regulations, known
as Standard 4.33.3, is the centerpiece of this
litigation. It states:

Wheelchair areas shall be an integral part
of any fixed seating plan and shall be
provided, so as to provide people with
physical disabilities a choice of admission
prices and lines of sight comparable to
those for members of the general public.
... At least one companion fixed seat shall
be provided next to each wheelchair seat-
ing area. When the seating capacity ex-
ceeds 300, wheelchair spaces shall be pro-
vided in more than one location....
28 C.F.R. Part 36, App. A, § 4.33.3 (1996).
The controversy concerns whether the “lines
of sight comparable” language of Standard
4.33.3 requires wheelchair seats to afford
sightlines over standing spectators.

The Department did not actually draft the
language of Standard 4.33.3; it was fashioned
by the Architectural and Transportation Bar-
riers Compliance Board, known as the Access
Board. Congress had instructed that Jus-
tice’sregulations be “consistent with the min-
imum guidelines and requirements issued
by” the Board. 42 U.S.C. § 12182(c). It is
comprised of 13 individuals appointed by the
president and representatives of 12 govern-
ment departments or agencies, including the
Department of Justice. See 29 U.S.C.
§ 792(a)(1) (1994). And it is charged, inter
alia, with “developing] advisory guidelines
for,” and “establishing] and maintaining]
minimum guidelines and requirements for
the standards issued pursuant to,” Title III
of the ADA. Id. § 792(b)(2), (3) (emphasis
added).
In January of 1991, the Board proposed
accessibility guidelines, one of which would
have required that wheelchair seating be “lo-
cated to provide lines of sight comparable to
those for all viewing areas.” It pointed out
that its wording “may not suffice in sports
arenas or race tracks where the audience
frequently stands.” Therefore it solicited
comments on “whether full lines of sight over
standing spectators ... should be required.”
56 Fed.Reg. 2296, 2314 (1991). Meanwhile,
in February of that year, the Justice Depart-
ment issued its own notice of proposed rule-’

1. The Olympics investigation culminated in May
of 1996with a settlement that identified Olympic
Stadium as "the most accessible stadium in the
world,” in part because "virtually allwheelchair.
581
making in which it proposed, inter alia, to
adopt [the Access Board’s] guidelines as the
accessibility standard applicable under this
rule” and in which it directed “any com-
ments” to those guidelines to be sent to the
Board. 56 Fed.Reg. 7452, 7478-79 (1991).
Although “[m]any commenters ... recom-
mended that lines of sight should be provided
over standing spectators,” the Board in July
issued a guideline, essentially the same as
the proposal, that omitted reference to the
standing spectator problem: it recommended
“lines of sight comparable to those available
to the rest of the public,” and stated that the
issue of lines of sight over standing specta-
tors “[would] be addressed in guidelines for
recreational facilities.” 56 Fed.Reg. 35,408,
35,440 (1991); see also 56 Fed.Reg. at 60,618.
On the same day, the Department promul-
gated Standard 4.33.3, worded identically to
the Board’s guideline.
Unlike the Board, the Department did not
initially express a view on whether the “lines
of sight comparable” language required
sightlines over standing spectators. In a
1992speech to á conference of Major League
Baseball stadium operators, the deputy chief
of the Public Access Section of the Depart-
ment of Justice did say that “[t]here is no
requirement of line of sight over standing
spectators.” By the middle of 1993,however,
when Justice initiated its investigation into
the accessibility of venues for the 1996 sum-
mer Olympicgames, itbegan taking the posi-
tion that “lines of sight comparable to those
for. members of the general public” meant
“line[s] of sight over standing spectators.”1
Then, in late 1994, Justice undertook to
publicize more formally its position that
“lines of sight comparable” included sight-
lines over standing spectators. As part of its
Title III regulatory responsibility, Justice is
required to “ensure the availability and pro-
vision of appropriate technical assistance
manuals.” 42 U.S.C. § 12206(c)(3). The De-
partment’s first Americans with Disabilities
Act Title III Technical Assistance Manual,
and several successive annual supplements,
contained exceedingly detailed requirements

seats have a comparable 'lineof sight,’so that
wheelchair users can stillsee the playing surfaceup
even when spectators in front of them stand
during the event.”

582
for compliance with Title III, but said noth-
ing about sightlines over standing spectators.
But, in December, the Department publish-
ed, without notice and comment, a supple-
ment to its manual that explicitly interpreted
“lines of sight comparable” to require sight-
lines over standing spectators. The supple-
ment noted that “wheelchair locations [must]
provide ... lines of sight comparable to
those for members of the general public,”
and stated, “[t]hus, in assembly areas where
spectators can be expected to stand during
the event or show being viewed, the wheel-
chair locations must provide lines of sight
over spectators who stand." (Emphasis add-
ed.)
A month after Justice issued the supple-
ment appellants chose four seating bowls for
the MCI Center: one each for hockey and
basketball games and two for concerts. The
seating bowls that appellants settled on in-
cluded wheelchair seating in the amount of
more than 1% of the total seats, as required
by regulation, and they allowed for a variety
of admission prices and locations in the are-
na. Some, but not all, of the wheelchair
seating in the chosen designs would have
lines of sight over standing spectators. It is
undisputed that, as they evaluated their op-
tions, appellants were fully aware that the
Justice Department had taken the position
that “lines of sight comparable” includes
sightlines over standing spectators.

Appellees, the Paralyzed Veterans of
America and several Washington-area sports
enthusiasts who use wheelchairs, challenged
the seating bowl designs in the district court
under the ADA’sprivate right of action. See
42 U.S.C. § 12188 (1994). They focused on
Standard 4.33.3’srequirements that wheel-
chair seating be integrated with seating for
ambulatory patrons, that it be dispersed
throughout the facility, and, at least as inter-
preted by Justice, that it provide lines of
sight over spectators who can be expected to
stand. Appellants responded that the seat-
ing bowls fully satisfied the integration and
dispersal requirements, and that Standard
4.33.3 properly read did not require that
wheelchair seating provide sightlines over
standing spectators. The Department, de-
spite its own enforcement authority in the
statute, see 42 U.S.C. § 12188(b), and not-
withstanding several invitations by the dis-
trict judge, refused to intervene in the case.
In contrast to its rather aggressive enforce-
ment posture in other similar cases, see gen-
erally David W. Dunlap, The Disabled Pres-
ent New Hurdles for Architects, N.Y. Times,
June 1, 1997,at 30, Justice sought to partici-
pate only as amicus. The district court
granted the Department leave to file a brief
but did not allow it to participate at oral
argument. The court refused to allow Jus-
tice to file a second brief which would have
“address[ed] [appellants’] arguments about
the Department of Justice’s interpretation
and enforcement of ... the ADA’sStandards
for Accessible Design.”
The district judge concluded that, although
the wheelchair seating in the proposed seat-
ing bowls was sufficiently integrated with the
seating for ambulatory patrons, it was not
adequately dispersed. As for the sightlines
requirement, the only issue that the parties
appeal, the district judge agreed with appel-
lees in the main. He concluded that Justice’s
manual interpretation was a binding con-
struction of its own regulation to which he
should defer. But he determined that the
regulation, as actually applied, did not re-
quire that every wheelchair seat have a line
of sight over standing spectators. In light of
his perception of Justice’s enforcement posi-
tions — what he termed a “hazy tapestry of
action and inaction”— along with the good
faith of appellants, he concluded that “sub-
stantial compliance”was sufficient. Accord-
ingly, although he found appellants’ initial
plan deficient, he subsequently approved a
plan which would provide sightlines over
standing spectators in 78% of the wheelchair
seating in one configuration, and 85% to 88%
in the other three.
The district court’s decision is challenged
from both directions. Appellants claim the
court erred in reading 4.33.3 to require any
sightlines over standing spectators. Appel-
lees believe the only error was in not requir-
ing that all wheelchair seating have such
sightlines.

II.
It should be understood that appellants do
not contend that the Department’s interpre-

tation of the regulation is unfaithful to the
governing statute. This ease involves just
the proper interpretation of the regulation.
Still, it raises important doctrinal issues.
Appellants present three arguments directed
at the district judge’s acceptance of the De-
partment’s interpretation of the regulation.
First, it is claimed that the Department and
the district judge, have it flatly wrong; the
language of the regulation simply will not
bear the interpretation the manual places on
it. Second, even if we think the regulation is
ambiguous, we should approach the task of
interpretation with fresh eyes— in other
words, without granting deference to the De-
partment’s interpretation. As such, we
should conclude that appellants’ reading of
the regulation is the better one. Third, even
if Justice could have interpreted the regula-
tion as it has in the manual as an initial
matter, the Department actually originally
adopted the interpretation appellants place
on it. Accordingly, the Department’s change
in interpretation is contrary to the Adminis-
trative Procedure Act because it circumvents
section 553, which requires that notice and
comment accompany the amendment ofregu-
lations. See 5 U.S.C. § 553 (1994). Even if
not a change, it constitutes a substantive
addition which itselfrequires notice and com-
ment.
A.
The phrase “lines of sight comparable to
those for members of the general public,”
appellants argue, means only that wheelchair
areas are to be dispersed throughout a facili-
ty. All different geographical locations with-
in that facility are to be available to wheel-
chair users. Appellees and the government,
in its amicus brief, point out that the regula-
tion, by requiring facilities with over 300
seats to provide wheelchair seating “in more
than one location” and to give wheelchair
users a choice of admission prices, already
accomplishes the dispersal objective, and
therefore “lines of sight comparable” must
have an added meaning — and the most obvi-
ous is an unobstructed view. We agree. We
think the language “lines of sight compara-
ble” quite naturally is interpreted to refer to
the ability of a wheelchair user to see a
performance without any obstruction.
583

Appellants maintain nevertheless that
“lines of sight comparable” — by the time it
was used in the regulation — had gathered a
specific meaning, a meaning other than that
which the Department manual ascribes to it.
(Appellants do not even concede that the
regulation refers to obstructions, but, in any
event, according to them, it certainly does
not cover a temporary obstruction caused by
standing spectators.) The language had its
genesis apparently in guidance issued by the
American National Standards Institute, a
private body, in 1980. Appellants contend
that there is no contemporary manifesta-
tion — not even a hint — that the Institute
meant the phrase to reach the standing spec-
tator problem. That may be so. Still, as
appellees and the government correctly in-
sist, there was no uniformly understood con-
struction of the language prior to the time it
was picked up by the Board and the Depart-
ment. Although there is no indication that
the words were intended to address sight-
lines over standing spectators, neither is
there any evidence to the contrary. The
words simply had not taken on a well-under-
stood meaning. It could be that the Board,
picking up the phrase from the Standards
Institute, intended it to be limited to perma-
nent obstructions, not standing spectators,
but as we discuss infra, that is relevant to
the question whether Justice’s manual inter-
pretation is entitled to deference and wheth-
er itshould be thought a modification of the
regulation; it does not demonstrate that
“lines of sight comparable” had developed a
universally accepted linguistic meaning con-
trary to the one Justice asserts.

B.
think the phrase “lines of sight
We thus
comparable” is easily read as a view no more
obstructed than would be available to non-
wheelchair users. But whether that refers
only to permanent obstructions or those
caused temporarily by standing spectators—
particularly vexing to those in wheelchairs
(children and shorter people may be able to
stand on the seats) — is by no means obvious.
As applied to that situation, the phrase is
ambiguous, which gives rise to the second

584

question: whether the manual interpretation
is entitled to deference.

Agency interpretations of their own
regulations have been afforded deference by
federal reviewing courts for a very long time
and are süstained unless “plainly erroneous
or inconsistent” with the regulation. See,
e.g., Thomas Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala, 512
U.S. 504, 512, 114 S.Ct. 2381, 2386, 129
L.Ed.2d 405 (1994); Bowles v. Seminole
Rock & Sand Co., 325 U.S. 410, 414, 65 S.Ct.
1215,1217,89 L.Ed. 1700 (1945). It is some­
times said that this deference is even greater
than that granted an agency interpretation of
a statute it is entrusted to administer. See,
e.g., Capital Network Sys., Inc. v. FCC, 28
F.3d 201, 206 (D.C.Cir.1994). In the after­
math of Chevron, it may be that our defer­
ence to agency interpretations of ambiguous
regulations is no different than that which we
afford to interpretations of ambiguous stat­
utes. It would seem that there are few, if
any, eases in which the standard applicable
under Chevron would yield a different result
than the “plainly erroneous or inconsistent”
in Bowles v.
standard set forth Seminole
Rock & Sand Co., supra. After all, Chevron
requires a reviewing court to affirm a per­
missible (or reasonable) interpretation of an
ambiguous statute, and we very much doubt
that we would defer to an unreasonable
agency interpretation of an ambiguous regu­
lation. See Thomas Jefferson, 512 U.S. at
512, 114S.Ct. at 2386.

2. Professor Manning acknowledges that an agen-
cy’sauthority to proceed through adjudication,
rather than rulemaking, may reduce that incen-
tive but here the Department must seek enforce-
ment in federal court.
His prescription is that the rule of ordinary
contract interpretation ambiguities are
construed against the drafter—that—shouldapply to
agency regulations. Wethink his contract model
for an agency drafting regulations does not quite
fit;itassumes that the only two “parties” are the
agency and the regulated class. Actually, when
an agency promulgates regulations, just as when
Congress passes legislation, many different par-
ties are affected and that includes various sorts
of beneficiaries who may have an interest in
giving the agency the benefit of the doubt. We
nevertheless appreciate serious discussions of le-
gal doctrine, increasingly rare in the leading law
Of late, it has been argued that the
Supreme Court should abandon deference to
agency interpretations of ambiguous regula­
tions, because it arguably creates perverse
incentives for an agency to' draft vague regu­
lations that give inadequate guidance. See
John F. Manning, Constitutional Structure
and Judicial Deference to Agency Interpre­
tations of Agency Rules, 96 Colum. L.Rev.
612 (1996);2 cf.Shalala v. Guernsey Memo­
rial Hosp., 514 U.S. 87, 108-09, 115 S.Ct.
1232, 1243, 131 L.Ed.2d 106 (1995) (O’Con­
nor, J., dissenting) (criticizing Court for de­
ferring to an agency interpretation “that
would force us to conclude that [the Secre
tary] has not fulfilled her statutory duty”);
Thomas Jefferson, 512 U.S. at 524, 114 S.Ct.
at 2392 (Thomas, J., dissenting). Although
the Court has only very recently reaffirmed
its doctrine of deference of this kind, see
Auer v. Robbins, — U.S. -, -, 117
S.Ct. 905, 911, 137 L.Ed.2d 79 (1997), there
is, to be sure, an outer limit to that deference
imposed by the Administrative Procedure
Act. A substantive regulation must have
sufficient content and definitiveness as to be
a meaningful exercise in agency lawmaking.
It is certainly not open to an agency to
promulgate mush and then give it concrete
form only through subsequent less formal
“interpretations.” Compare Manning, supra,
at 655-57. That technique would circumvent
section 553, the notice and comment proce-
dures of the APA.3 But appellants do not
actually argue that the regulation at issue is
of that type— and we do not think it can be

journals. See Harry T. Edwards, The Growing
Disjunction BetweenLegal Education and the Le­
gal Profession, 91 Mich L.Rev. 34, 42 (1992);
United States v. Six Hundred and Thirty-Nine
Thousand Five Hundred and Fifty-Eight Dollars
in U.S. Currency, 955 F.2d 712, 722 (D.C.Cir.­
1992) (Silberman, L, concurring); see also Debo­
rah J. Merritt & Melanie Putnam, Judges and
Scholars: Do Courts and Scholarly Journals Cite
the Same(1996).LawReviewArticles? 71 Chi -Kent L.
Rev. 871
3. In that regard, surely the APA imposes a con­
siderably tighter restriction than does the non-­
delegation doctrine as applied to legislation. See
Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIOv. American Pe­
troleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 100 S.Ct. 2844, 65
L.Ed.2d 1010 (1980). Indeed, a broad delega­
tion of substantive authority may require stricter
procedural safeguards.

so fairly characterized.4 Nor do we believe
the proposed regulation did not give ade­
quate notice that it could be interpreted as
the Department now does. Anyone consider­
ing the phrase “lines of sight comparable”
should have thought that it might imply an
unobstructed view over standing spectators.
Appellants, nevertheless, argue that
deference is inappropriate here because it
was not the Department of Justice that actu­
ally drafted the regulation; itwas the Access
Board which did so, as a proposed guideline.
Indeed, Justice’s notice indicated that it in­
tended to adopt the Board’s standards and
that responses should be directed to the
Board, thus suggesting that it was the Board
that controlled the process by which the lan­
guage of both the guideline and the regula­
tion was to be adopted. We do not defer,
however, to an administrative agency’s inter­
pretation of its regulation solely because its
employees are the drafters and presumably
have superior knowledge as to what they
intended. Of course, contemporary indica­
tions as to what the agency meant by the
language used, such as the comments re­
ceived, could play the same role as legislative
history does in both steps of a Chevron anal­
ysis. See, e.g., King Broadcasting Co. v.
FCC, 860 F.2d 465, 469 (D.C.Cir.1988); City
of Cleveland v. NRC, 68 F.3d 1361, 1366
(D.C.Cir.1995). But the doctrine of defer­
ence is based primarily on the agency’sstatu­
tory role as the sponsor of the regulation, not
necessarily on its drafting expertise. See
Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 91, 110, 112,
112 S.Ct. 1046, 1058, 1059, 117 L.Ed.2d 239
(1992); American Train Dispatchers Ass’n
v. ICC, 54 F.3d 842, 848 (D.C.Cir.1995), cert.
denied, — U.S. -, 116 S.Ct. 1261, 134
L.Ed.2d 210 (1996); see also Pauley v. Beth-­
Energy Mines, Inc., 501 U.S. 680, 111 S.Ct.
2524, 115 L.Ed.2d 604 (1991). Under Chev­
ron, an agency’s interpretation of ambiguous
statutory language is entitled to deference
because of the agency’s delegated authority

4. Appellants do argue that the interpretation vio-
lates section 553 because it reversed prior agen-
cy position. That argument is taken up infra.
5. Appellants mistakenly rely on Kelleyto suggest
that the Department is not entitled to deference
because this is a suit between private persons
585
to administer the statute, and the same con­
sideration underlies deference to an agency’s
interpretation of its own regulation. The
resolution of ambiguities in a regulation im­
plicates the same sort of policy choices it
does with regard to a statute, see, e.g., Pau­
ley, 501 U.S. at 697, 111 S.Ct. at 2534, and
Congress should therefore be thought to
have delegated to agencies the authority to
reconcile regulatory ambiguities. Once the
Board’s language was put out by the Depart­
ment as its own regulation, itbecame, as the
statute contemplates, the Justice Depart­
ment’s and only the Justice Department’s
responsibility. That is why this case is dif­
ferent from those upon which appellants rely
involving a statute (or regulation) adminis­
tered by more than one department or agen­
cy. See, e.g., Wachtel v. OTS, 982 F.2d 581,
585 (D.C.Cir.1993); Association of Am. Phy­
sicians and Surgeons, Inc. v. Clinton, 997
F.2d 898, 913 (D.C.Cir.1993).
We recognize that the Department has no
administrative adjudicatory authority which
it could use to interpret its regulation; either
it or a private party must go to federal court
to enforce the regulation. Yet Congress un­
questionably delegated to the Department
the authority to flesh out the statutory
framework by issuance of its regulations, so
the Department has a good deal more le­
gal/policymaking authority than would be
true if it had merely a prosecuting role.
Compare Kelley v. EPA, 15 F.3d 1100, 1108
(D.C.Cir.1994), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1110,
115 S.Ct. 900, 130 L.Ed.2d 784 (1995).5
Moreover— and we think this is significant—
specifically requiring publi­
Congress, by the
cation of a technical manual that would fur­
ther refine or interpret in detail the regula­
tion’s substantive obligations, contemplated a
continuing administration of the regulation
that approaches, if not equates with, the
adjudicatory authority of other statutory
schemes.

brought under the ADA’sprivate right of action.
There, we concluded that the EPAlacked statuto-
ry authority to issue regulations defining CERC-
LAliability of a particular classwhere the statute
provided that liabilitywould be determined by
the court.

586
C.
We have concluded that the language of
Standard 4.33.3 is susceptible to Justice’s
present interpretation and that the statutory-
scheme contemplates that we would defer to
the Department’s reasonable interpretations
of its regulation as set forth in the technical
manual. That does not mean that appellees
and the government are home free regarding
their interpretation of the regulation. Appel-
lants’most powerful argument remains: that
the Department of Justice’s present interpre-
tation of the regulation constitutes a funda-
mental modification of its previous interpre-
tation and, even if it legitimately could have
reached the present interpretation originally,
it cannot switch its position merely by revis-
ing the technical manual. Once an agency
gives its regulation an interpretation, it can
only change that interpretation as it would
formally modify the regulation itself:
through the process of notice and comment
rulemaking.
The government asserts that even if
appellants’ characterization of the Justice
Department’s initial treatment of the regula­
tion were correct— which both it and appel­
lees deny agency is completely free to
change — aninterpretation an ambiguous
its of
regulation so long as the regulation reason­
ably will bear the second interpretation. The
government argues that an agency has the
same latitude to modify its interpretation of a
regulation as it does its interpretation of a
statute under Chevron. We think the gov­
ernment is wrong. The premise of Chevron,
as we have noted, is that Congress has dele­
gated implicitly to administrative agencies
and departments the authority to reconcile,
within reason, ambiguities in statutes that
the agencies and departments are charged
with administering. See, e.g.,Kelley, 15 F.3d
at 1108; Oil, Chem. & Atomic Workers Int’l
Union, AFL-CIO v. NLRB, 46 F.3d 82, 90
(D.C.Cir.), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 116
S.Ct. 81, 133 L.Ed.2d 39 (1995). That dele­
gation is, as the Supreme Court recognized
in Chevron, itself a continuing one; there is
no barrier to an agency altering its initial
interpretation to adopt another reasonable
interpretation — even one that represents a
new policy response generated by a different
administration. See Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v.
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,
467 U.S. 837, 863, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 2791, 81
L.Ed.2d 694 (1984). The government is cer-
tainly correct in suggesting that the doctrine
of deference to an agency’sinterpretation of
its own regulation and Chevron deference are
analogous. But Congress — and it is congres-
sional will that is crucial— has said more,
specifically on the subject of regulations.
Under the APA, agencies are obliged to en-
gage in notice and comment before formulat-
ing regulations, which applies as well to ‘'re-
peals'’ or “amendments.” See 5 U.S.C.
§ 551(5). To allow an agency to make a
fundamental change in its interpretation of a
substantive regulation without notice and
comment obviously would undermine those
APA requirements. That is surely why the
Supreme Court has noted (in dicta) that APA
rulemaking is required where an interpreta-
tion “adopt[s] a new position inconsistent
with ... existing regulations.” Shalala v.
Guernsey Memorial Hosp., 514 U.S. 87, 100,
115 S.Ct. 1232, 1239, 131 L.Ed.2d 106 (1995);
see also National Family Planning & Re-
productive Health Ass’n v. Sullivan, 979
F.2d 227, 240-41 (D.C.Cir.1992).
reject bold,
We therefore the government’s
complete analogy to Chevron and turn to the
question whether the Department should be
regarded, as appellants argue, as having ac-
tually “amended” its regulation without no-
tice and comment in contravention of section
553. Appellees and the government insist
that no authoritative interpretation of the
phrase “lines of sight comparable” was ever
presented until the supplement to the manual
was published in 1994. As we have de-
scribed, the Board in its notice of proposed
rulemaking conceded that the guidelines
“may not suffice in sports arenas or race
tracks where the audience frequently
stands.” It solicited comments on “whether
full lines of sight over standing spectators
... should be required,” and in promulgating
the final rule the Board acknowledged that
“[m]any commenters ... recommended that
lines of sight should be provided over stand-
ing spectators” — which implies that the
Board did not believe its guidelines alleviated
their concern. 56 Fed.Reg. at 35,440. It

then stated its “intention to address the issue
of lines of sight over standing spectators in
the guidelines for recreational facilities which
will be proposed at a future date.” 56 Fed.
Reg. at 60,618.
If the Department, when it promulgated
the regulation, had said what the Board said,
or even clearly adopted what the Board said,
itwould be hard to conclude that the Depart-
ment did not subsequently “amend” the reg-
ulation in violation of the APA. But Justice
did not do so in its statement of basis and
purpose. It never referred to the Board’s
concern, nor did it imply that its regulation
did not address the problem of lines of sight
over standing spectators. It may well be
that itis a plausible inference that Justice, at
the time, deliberately intended the regulation
to mean the same thing as did the Board—
but it is not a necessary inference. And, as
we have observed, Congress did not mandate
that Justice followthe Board’s guidelines. It
said only that “[standards included in regu-
lations issued under [the facility provisions of
Title III] shall be consistent with the mini-
mum guidelines and requirements issued by
the ... Board.” 42 U.S.C. § 12186(e) (em-
phasis added). Nothing prevented the De-
partment from imposing a greater burden on
those entities covered by its regulation.
Appellants, in their effort to tease out of
events prior to the 1994 supplement a previ­
ous inconsistent department interpretation,
can point only to a speech given by the
deputy chief of the Public Access Section of
the Civil Rights Division to Major League
Baseball stadium operators, in which she said
“[t]here is no requirement for line of sight
over standing spectators.”6 A speech of a
mid-level official of an agency, however, is
not the sort of “fair and considered judg­
ment” that can be thought of as an authorita­
tive departmental position. Auer, — U.S.
at -, 117 S.Ct. at 912; see also Drum­
mond Coal Co. v. Hodel, 796 F.2d 503, 508
(D.C.Cir.1986), cert. denied, 480 U.S. 941, 107

6. The Assistant Attorney General in charge ofthe
Civil Rights Division (to which the Department
has delegated enforcement of Title III) testified
that from 1991 untilhe leftoffice in 1993 “itwas
never the position ... of Justice that wheelchair
locations were required to have lines of sight
over spectators ... who spontaneously stand.”
587
S.Ct. 1593, 94 L.Ed.2d 782 (1987). It is not
equivalent to the technical assistance manual,
which “represented formal agency action
upon which affected parties could reasonably
rely, in contrast to the informal, nonauthori-­
tative nature of what had gone before.” New
York State Dep’t of Soc. Serv. v. Bowen, 835
F.2d 360, 366 (D.C.Cir.1987), cert. denied,
486 U.S. 1055, 108 S.Ct. 2820, 100 L.Ed.2d
922 (1988). If the supplement to the manual
had not issued prior to appellants’ com­
mencement of arena planning, the speech
might well take on added significance, but it
is not open to appellants to claim that they
reasonably relied to their detriment on the
speech or any other indication of the Depart­
ment’s interpretation. As noted, there is no
question but that appellants were on notice
of Justice’s interpretation. See Methodist
Hosp. of Sacramento v. Shalala, 38 F.3d
1225, 1235 n. 14 (D.C.Cir.1994); compare
Satellite Broadcasting Co., Inc. v. FCC, 824
F.2d 1, 4 (D.C.Cir.1987)(if an agency “wishes
to use [an] interpretation to cut off a party’s
right, it must give full notice of its interpre­
tation”).
We admit the issue is not easy; appellants
almost but do not quite establish that the
Department significantly changed its inter-
pretation of the regulation when itissued the
1994 technical manual. We conclude finally,
however, that the Department never authori-
tatively adopted a position contrary to its
manual interpretation and as such it is a
permissible construction of the regulation.
We are left with the question whether the
interpretation is itself a “substantive rule”
having the force of law and, for that indepen-
dent but related reason, is subject to notice
and comment. See 5 U.S.C. § 553(b),
(b)(3)(A). As we have often recognized, it is
quite difficult to draw a line between sub-
stantive and interpretative rules. See, e.g.,
American Mining Congress v. MSHA, 995
F.2d 1106, 1108-09 (D.C.Cir.1993); Ameri-
can Hosp. Ass’n v. Bowen, 834 F.2d 1037,

That testimony, putting aside its negative phras-
ing, is no more probative than would be a con-
gressman’s post-enactment testimony as to what
See,CongressintendedUnderwood,whenitpassedlegislation.552,
67, e.g.,Pierce2541,v. 2545-46,487 U.S. 556-
(1988).108S.Ct. 101 L.Ed.2d 490

588
1046 (D.C.Cir.1987). A number of our cases
suggest the result turns on whether the
agency “intend[s]” the rule “to create new
rights or duties.” See, e.g., Orengo-Carabal­
lo, 11 F.3d 186, 195 (D.C.Cir.1993). But we
have recognized that a stated intent to treat
a major substantive legal addition as an “in­
terpretative” rule will not by itself suffice to
escape the notice and comment requirements
of section 553. See American Mining Con­
gress, 995 F.2d at 1109-10; Chamber of Com­
merce v. OSHA, 636 F.2d 464, 468 (D.C.Cir.­
1980). We still must look to whether the
interpretation itself carries “the force and
effect of law,” see American Mining Con­
gress, 995 F.2d at 1109 (citing Attorney Gen­
eral’s Manual on the Administrative Proce­
dure Act (1947)), or rather whether it spells
out a duty fairly encompassed within the
regulation that the interpretation purports to
construe. See, e.g., Kelley, 15 F.3d at 1108.
The Department’s interpretation of
its regulation, of course, has real conse­
quences. But that is always true when a
Department or agency selects an interpreta­
tion of an ambiguous statute or rule, and
often we acknowledge a government agency’s
right to do so as an “interpretative” rule
without notice and comment. See, e.g., Fer­
tilizer Inst. v. EPA, 935 F.2d 1303, 1308
(D.C.Cir.1991). The distinction between an
interpretative and substantive rule more like­
ly turns on how tightly the agency’sinterpre­
tation is drawn linguistically from the actual
language of the statute or rule. See, e.g.,
Chamber of Commerce, 636 F.2d at 469. If
the statute or rule to be interpreted is itself
very general, using terms like “equitable” or
“fair,” and the “interpretation” really pro­
vides all the guidance, then the latter will
more likely be a substantive regulation. See,
e.g., United States v. Picciotto, 875 F.2d 345,
348 (D.C.Cir.1989). Here, however, the gov­
ernment’s position is driven by the actual
meaning it ascribes to the phrase “lines of
sight comparable” — the “legal base upon

7. The manual itselfsuggests that lines of sight
over standing spectators may be provided at the
expense of integration: such lines of sight "can
be accomplished in many ways, including plac-
ing wheelchair locations at the front of a seating
section, or by providing sufficient elevation for
wheelchair locations placed at the rear ofseating
which the rule rests.” United Technologies
v. EPA 821 F.2d 714, 719-20 (D.C.Cir.1987).
In this case, even “in the absence of the
[interpretation] there would [ ] be an ade-
quate [regulatory] basis for enforcement ac-
tion to ... ensure the performance of
duties.” American Mining Congress, 995
F.2d at 1112. In other words, the govern-
ment arguably could have relied on the regu-
lation itself, even without the manual inter-
pretation, to seek lines of sight over standing
spectators. In sum, we believe the manual
interpretation is not sufficiently distinct or
additive to the regulation to require notice
and comment.

III.
In their cross-appeal, appellees contend
that the district judge erred in holding that
only “substantial” compliance with the De-
partment’s regulation is required of arena
builders. It will be recalled that the district
judge’s final order called for 75-88% of
wheelchair seating to be provided with a view
over standing spectators. Appellees’ argu-
ment stems not from its own interpretation
of the regulation, but rather from its claim
that the Department interprets the regula-
tion to require 100% compliance. The dis-
trict court, we are told, should have deferred
in this respect to the Department’s interpre-
tation of its regulation just as it did regard-
ing the meaning of the phrase “lines of sight
comparable.”
The difficulty with appellees’ argument is
that the government never indicated in the
manual whether every single wheelchair loca-
tion must be afforded a view over standing
spectators, and the district judge thought
there was some practical tension between the
lines of sight requirement and the companion
requirement in the regulation that wheel-
chair seating be dispersed (yet integrated
with other seating) throughout the facility.7
Indeed, the Department had indicated in let-
ters from its trial attorneys and a document

sections to allow those spectators to see over the
spectators who stand in front of them.” The
district court noted that “[i]f anything, [appel-
lees] have argued that the seating istoo integrat-
ed, and that lines ofsight have suffered from the
failure to place wheelchair spaces further above
those seats in front ofthem.”

called a 1996 Accessible Stadium Memoran-
dum that unobstructed sightlines are re-
quired only at “all or substantially all”wheel-
chair locations. And in a settlement reached
with the organizers of the Atlanta Olympics,
the Department agreed that “substantially
all” wheelchair locations would provide unob-
structed sightlines; this after advising the
organizers that Justice would not agree to
settle unless “at least a reasonable number”
of the wheelchair seats had lines of sight
over standing spectators.
that the district judge
Appellees contend
misunderstood the Department’s officialposi-
tion because he erroneously refused to per-
mit the Department to file a second amicus
brief which explained — as the Department
has before us— -that the Department permits
substantial compliance only where (1) 100%
compliance is structurally impractical or
technically infeasible, or (2) where standing
spectators’ views are obstructed by other
standing spectators. Appellees dismiss the
district court’s reliance on the Atlanta settle-
ment, because it was merely an exercise of
enforcement discretion with no precedential
value.
Although there are circumstances in which
a federal court may accept an agency’sinter­
pretation of a statute or regulation set forth
only in an amicus brief, see Auer, — U.S. at
-, 117 S.Ct. at 911-12 (1997); com­
pare Church of Scientology v. IRS, 792 F.2d
153, 162 n. 4 (D.C.Cir.1986) (en bane), aff'd,
484 U.S. 9, 108 S.Ct. 271, 98 L.Ed.2d 228
(1987), with id. at 165-66 (Silberman, J.,
concurring), it is not clear here that the
Department, which has the authority and
duty to issue technical assistance manuals
interpreting and applying its regulation, can
further add to its interpretation in litiga­
tion— and get deference to that marginally
additional interpretation. Cf. General Elec.
Co. v. EPA, 53 F.3d 1324, 1329 (D.C.Cir.­
1995). In any event, a federal district court,
unlike a court of appeals, see Fed. R.App. P.
29, is not obliged to accept an amicus brief
from the government, let alone a second one
purporting to refine arguments that could
have been presented in its first. In this case,
an understandably exasperated district
judge, who had repeatedly asked the govern-
589
ment to come into the case as an iniervenor,
was surely within his discretion in rejecting
the second amicus brief. Without that brief,
we do not see that-appellees had much of an
argument and they certainly may not im­
prove their position by relying on the govern­
ment’s amicus brief on appeal. This is not a
case of “agency action,” the review of which
is strictly a question of law. See Marshall
County Health Care Auth. v. Shalala, 988
F.2d 1221, 1225 (D.C.Cir.1993). Appellees
came into federal court as a private party
seeking equitable relief. Under the circum­
stances, we think the district judge was more
than justified in concluding there was a good
deal of wiggle room in the degree of compli­
ance contemplated by the regulation and
manual, and that he, as a judge sitting in
equity, had ample discretion to fashion the
remedial order that he did.
Appellees (and the government) complain
that to affirm the district court on this point
would encourage disuniformity of interpreta-
tion of the regulation. That argument over-
looks the Department of Justice’s authority
to put out an amendment to the manual
which clarifies its position. Perhaps the gov-
ernment really would like to preserve a cer-
tain flexibility, which may explain why it
refused to come in as intervenor. But the
government cannot have it both ways; if it
wishes uniformity in treatment, it certainly
has the legal tools to accomplish that result.
The judgment of the district court is af-
firmed.





UNITED STATES of America, Appellee,
v.
Kevin HOLLAND, Appellant.
Nos. 96-3045, 96-3065.

United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.
Argued May 8, 1997.
Decided July 8, 1997.