Community Nutrition Institute v. Young — 818 F.2d 943 (D.C. Cir. 1987) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/488514.pdf

COMMUNITY NUTRITION INSTITUTE,
et al., Appellants, Laura A. Rogers
v.

Frank YOUNG, Commissioner, Food
and Drug Administration.
No. 84-5223.

United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.
Argued Dec. 19, 1986.

Decided May 15, 1987.




























1951); Weinberger, 651 F.Supp. at 735-36; Al-
len, 601 F.Supp. at 489-91; United States v.
Kahan, 350 F.Supp. 784, 791-93 (S.D.N.Y.1972),
aff'd inpart and rev’din part on other grounds,
479 F.2d 290 (2d Cir.1973), rev’d on other
grounds, 415 U.S.239, 94 S.Ct. 1179, 39 L.Ed.2d
297 (1974). "Operation of a government agency
and enforcement of criminal law dobeyondnotamal-
gamate to give aBlok,rightofsearch the
scope of either.” 188F.2d at 1021.

944
William B. Schultz, with whom Alan B.
Morrison and Katherine A. Meyer, Wash-
ington, D.C., were on the brief for appel-
lants.
Michael J. Ryan, Asst. U.S. Atty., with
whom Joseph E. diGenova, U.S. Atty.,
Royce C. Lamberth, Craig Lawrence, Asst.
U.S. Attys., Washington, D.C., Thomas
Scarlett, Chief Counsel, Rockville, Md.. and
Michael M. Landa, Associate Chief Counsel
for Enforcement, Food and Drug Admin.,
were on the brief for appellee. Patricia J.
Kenney, Asst. U.S. Atty., Washington,
D.C., Stephen D. Terman, Counsel, Food
and Drug Admin., Rockville, Md., Richard
K. Willard, Atty. Gen., Leonard Schaitman
and John M. Rogers, Attorneys, Dept, of
Justice, Washington, D.C., entered appear-
ances for appellee.

Philip C. Olsson, Washington, D.C., was
on the brief for amicus curiae in support of
appellee, State of South Carolina, urging
affirmance of the Dist. Court decision,
Before MIKVA, EDWARDS and
STARR, Circuit Judges.

Opinion PER CURIAM.
Opinion concurring in part and
dissenting in part filed by Circuit Judge
STARR.

PER CURIAM:
This case makes its second appearance
before this court. It presents a challenge
by a consortium of organizations and pri-
vate citizens (collectively referred to as
CNI) to the Food and Drug Administra-
tion’s regulation of certain unavoidable
contaminants in food, most particularly, af-
latoxins in corn.1 Pursuant to its statutory
mandate to limit the amount of “poisonous
or deleterious substances” in food, see 21
U.S.C. § 346, FDA establishes “action lev-
els” informing food producers of the allow-
able levels of unavoidable contaminants
such as aflatoxins. Producers who sell
products that are contaminated above the
action level, which for aflatoxins in corn is
currently set at 20 parts per billion, are
subject to enforcement proceedings initi-
ated by FDA.
CNI filed suit in federal district court,
launching a three-pronged attack on FDA’s
action level for aflatoxins in corn: (1) in
issuing the action level, FDA failed to com-
ply with the rulemaking requirements of
the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDC
Act), see 21 U.S.C. § 346; (2) the action
level violated the Administrative Procedure
Act because it constitutes a legislative rule
issued without the requisite notice-and-com-
ment procedures, see 5 U.S.C. § 553; and
(3) FDA’s decision to permit adulterated
corn to be blended with unadulterated corn
1. Aflatoxins are by-products of certain common
molds that grow on various crops, including
corn.
2. The APAdefines “rule" as "the whole or a part
of an agency statement of general or particular
applicability and future effect designed to im-
plement, interpret, or prescribe law or poli-
945

to bring the total contamination within the
action level violated the FDC Act. The
District Court granted summary judgment
in favor of FDA on each issue.
In our initial opinion, we confined our-
selves to CNI’s first argument. We con-
cluded that the FDC Act, by stating that
FDA “shall promulgate regulations,” 21
U.S.C. § 346, required that FDA issue for-
mal regulations or “tolerances,” rather
than informal action levels. Having invali-
dated the action level on this ground, we
concluded that CNI’s APA argument was
thus rendered moot and that the blending
issue stood in need of reevaluation on re-
mand. See 757 F.2d 354 (D.C.Cir.1985).
The Supreme Court reversed our deci-
sion, — U.S. -, 106 S.Ct. 2360, 90
L.Ed.2d 959, holding that the FDC Act was
not so clear as to preclude FDA’sinterpre-
tation of the statute under which the agen-
cy could lawfully proceed by way of action
levels. 106 S.Ct. 2360 (1986). Since the
Court did not reach the APA or blending
issues, it remanded the case to this court
for “further proceedings consistent with
[its]opinion.” Id. at 2366. Thus, with the
first issue resolved by the High Court, we
must now address the still pending APA
and blending issues.

I

Under the APA, agency rules2 may be
issued only after the familiar notice-and-
comment procedures enumerated in the
statute are completed. See 5 U.S.C. § 553.
It is undisputed that the action level at
issue here was promulgated sans those
procedures. FDA, however, argues that
notice-and-comment requirements do not
apply by virtue of subsection (b)(3)(A)of
section 553, which carves out an exception
for “interpretative rules [and] general
statements of policy.” According to the
cy____” 5 U.S.C.§ 551(4). FDA does not dis-
pute that its action levels are indeed "rules.”
The notice-and-comment requirements of sec-
tion 553 are thus unquestionably triggered and
the only question before us is whether one of
the statutory exceptions to notice and comment
isapplicable.

946

FDA, action levels represent nothing more
than nonbinding statements of agency en-
forcement policy. CNI, on the other hand,
argues that the action levels restrict en-
forcement discretion to such a degree as to
constitute legislative rules.
The distinction between legislative rules
and interpretative rules or policy state-
ments has been described at various times
as “tenuous,” Chisholm v. FCC, 538 F.2d
349, 393 (D.C.Cir.), cert. denied, 429 U.S.
890, 97 S.Ct. 247, 50 L.Ed.2d 173 (1976),
“fuzzy,” Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v.
FPC, 506 F.2d 33, 38 (D.C.Cir.1974),
“blurred,” Saunders, Interpretative Rules
With Legislative Effect: An Analysis and
a Proposal For Public Participation, 1986
Duke L.J. 346, 352, and, perhaps most pic-
turesquely, “enshrouded in considerable
smog.” Noel v. Chapman, 508 F.2d 1023,
1030(2dCir.),cert. denied, 423 U.S. 824,96
S.Ct. 37, 46 L.Ed.2d 40 (1975), quoted in
American Bus Association v. United
States, 627 F.2d 525, 529 (D.C. Cir.1980).3
As Professor Davis puts it, “the problem is
baffling.” 2 K. Davis, Administrative Law
Treatise 32 (2d ed. 1979). By virtue of
Congress’ silence with respect to this mat-
ter, it has fallen to the courts to discern the
line through the painstaking exercise of,
hopefully, sound judgment. Guardian
Federal Savings & Loan Ass’n v. FSLIC,
589 F.2d 658, 667 (D.C.Cir.1978).
Despite the difficulty of the terrain,
prior cases do provide some useful guide­
posts. In this circuit, we are particularly
guided by American Bus. There, in
speaking for the court, Judge McGowan
3. See also Brock v. Cathedral Bluffs Shale Oil
Co., 796 F.2d 533, 536-37 (D.C.Cir.1986)
("[T]here is no axiom to distinguish between a
regulation and general statements of policy.").
4. The first criterion from American Bus could
be read as facially inconsistent with the APA.
Specifically, criterion one appears to indicate
that interpretative rules must be solely prospec-
tive:- "[C]ourts have said that, unless a pro-
nouncement acts prospectively, it is a binding
norm.” 627 F.2d at 529. Since under the APA,
interpretative rules can be developed and of-
fered as present indications of the agency’s en-
forcement policy, this "present-is-legislative"
reading of American Bus would create a conflict
with the statutory definition. In our view, how-
identified “two criteria” that courts have
used in their efforts to fathom the interpre-
tative/legislative distinction:
First, courts have said that, unless a
pronouncement acts prospectively, it is a
binding norm. Thus ... a statement of
policy may not have a present effect: “a
‘general statement of policy’is one that
does not impose any rights and obli-
gations” ____
The second criterion is whether a pur-
ported policy statement genuinely leaves
the agency and its decisionmakers free to
exercise discretion.
627 F.2d at 529 (quoting Texaco v. FPC,
412 F.2d 740, 744 (3d Cir.1969)).4
In conducting our analysis of these two
criteria, we consider and give some, albeit
“not overwhelming,” deference to an agen-
cy’s characterization of its statement.
Brock v. Cathedral Bluffs Shale Oil Co.,
796 F.2d 533, 537 (D.C.Cir.1986).5 As be-
fits a principled exercise in interpretation,
courts are to give far greater weight to the
language actually used by the agency; we
have, for example, found decisive the
choice between the words “will” and
“may.” Compare American Bus, 627
F.2d at 532 (use of “will” indicates state-
ment is in fact a binding norm) with
Guardian Federal, 589 F.2d at 666 (use of
“may” indicates statement is a “general
statement of policy”).
Applying these principles to the
case at hand, we are persuaded that the
FDA action levels are legislative rules and
thus subject to the notice-and-comment re­
quirements of section 553. While FDA
ever, criterion one from American Bus is ad-
dressed to the binding effect of the agency pro-
nouncement; if a statement has a present-day
binding effect, it is legislative. Mere pro-
nouncements of what the agency intends,
whether for the present or for the future, which
do not have a binding effect,are properly classi-
fied as interpretative rules. Thus, it isthe bind-
ing effect, not the timing, which is the essence
of criterion one.
5. As now-Justice Scalia put it when writing for
this court: “[T]here is deference and there is
deference— and the degree accorded to the agen-
cy point overwhelming.”
on a such as this isnot
Cathedral Bluffs, 796 F.2d at 537.

now characterizes the action levels as poli-
cy statements, see, e.g., Supplemental Brief
for Appellee at 7 (“In sum, action levels do
not bind courts, food producers or FDA.”),
a variety of factors, when considered in
light of the criteria set out in American
Bus, indicate otherwise.
First. The language employed by FDA
in creating and describing action levels
suggests that those levels both have a
present effect and are binding. Specifical-
ly, the agency’sregulations on action levels
explain an action level in the following
way:
[A]n action level for an added poisonous
or deleterious substance ... may be es-
tablished to define the level of contam-
ination at which food will be deemed to
be adulterated. An action level may
prohibit any detectable amount of sub-
stance in food.
21 C.F.R. § 109.4(1986) (emphasis added).6
This language, speaking as it does of an
action level “defining]” the acceptable lev-
el and “prohibitpng]” substances, clearly
reflects an interpretation of action levels as
presently binding norms.7 This type of
mandatory, definitive language is a power-
ful, even potentially dispositive, factor sug-
gesting that action levels are substantive
rules. Cf. Cathedral Bluffs, 796 F.2d at
538. Moreover, the regulations provide
that an action level may appropriately be
established whenever there exist the same
conditions required to establish a formal

6. The conditional "may” in this provision refers
only to the agency’s discretion in deciding
whether to establish an action level. It does not
suggest that, once established, an action level is
non-binding. Rather, with respect to binding
effect, the regulation speaks in non-conditional
terms.

7. See also Action Levels for Poisonous or Delete-
rious Substances in Human Food and Animal
Feed (FDA Publication 1980)(“Actionlevels and
tolerances represent limits at or above which
FDAwill take legal action to remove adulterated
products from the market.”) (emphasis added),
reprinted in Joint Appendix (J.A.) at 76, 77.

8. The specific action level for aflatoxin in corn
was published in the Federal Register. In Cathe-
dral Bluffs, this court indicated that such publi-
cation did not necessarily suggest that "the mat-
ter published was meant to be a regulation,
947

tolerance, if, in addition, the “appropriate-
ness” of the tolerance may change in the
near future because, for example, of tech-
nological changes. 21 C.F.R. § 109.6(c);
see also id. § 109.6(b) (requirements for
establishing a tolerance).8
Second. This view of action levels— as
having a present, binding effect— is con-
firmed by the fact that FDA considers it
necessary for food producers to secure ex-
ceptions to the action levels. A specific
regulatory provision allows FDA to “ex-
empt from regulatory action and permit the
marketing of any food that is unlawfully
contaminated with a poisonous or deleteri-
ous substance” if certain conditions exist.
Id. § 109.8(a). This language implies that
in the absence of an exemption, food with
aflatoxin contamination over the action lev-
el is “unlawful.” This putatively unlawful
status can derive only from the action lev-
el, which, again, indicates that the action
level is a presently binding norm. If, as
the agency would have it, action levels did
indeed “not bind courts, food producers or
FDA,” Supplemental Brief for Appellee at
7, it would scarcely be necessary to require
that “exceptions” be obtained.
Third. On several occasions, in authoriz-
ing blending of adulterated with unadulter-
ated corn, see infra Part II, the FDA has
made statements indicating that action lev-
els establish a binding form. For example,
in a telegram to the Commissioner of the
South Carolina Department of Agriculture,

since the APA requires general statements of
policy to be published as well.” 796 F.2d at 539
(emphasis in original). Rather, the Cathedral
Bluffs court indicated that the "real dividing
point between regulations and general state-
ments of policy is publication in the Code of
Federal Regulations.” Id. This factor, among
others, led the court to conclude that the pro-
nouncement at issue therecase,washowever,ageneralstate-
ment of policy. In our the line
cannot be so simply drawn. While the specific
action level itselfwas not published in the Code
of Federal Regulations, FDA did publish in the
C.F.R. regulations authorizing establishment of
action levels which, as noted above, indicate
that action levels are to have a binding effect.
Thus, we deal with a mixed Federal Register-
C.F.R. publication, and accordingly find our-
selves unable to divine persuasive indications,
one way or another, from what may be called
the "publication factor.”

948

in which itindicated its approval of a blend-
ing plan, the FDA stated that “[a]ny ship-
ments made independent of this plan
would, if found to exceed the 20 ppb level,
be considered adulterated and subject to
condemnation.” Joint Appendix (J.A.) at
112 (emphasis added). But we need not
resort to informal communications, cf.
Ciba-Geigy Corp. v. EPA, 801 F.2d 430
(D.C.Cir.1986), where precision of drafts-
manship may understandably be wanting.
For, in a formal notice published in the
Federal Register of a decision to permit
blending and interstate shipment, FDA
wrote:
Any food that contains aflatoxin in ex-
cess of 20 ppb ... is considered by FDA
to be adulterated under section 402(a)(1)
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(1)),and therefore
may not be shipped in interstate com-
merce.
46 Fed.Reg. 7447 (1981) (emphasis added),
reprinted in J.A. at 49. Both statements,
one informal and the other elaborately for-
mal, indicate that, when judged under the
American Bus criteria, action levels consti-
tute substantive rules. The agency's own
words strongly suggest that action levels
are not musings about what the FDA
might do in the future but rather that they
set a precise level of aflatoxin contamina-
tion that FDA has presently deemed per-
missible. Action levels inform food produc-
ers what this level is; indeed, that is their
very purpose.
We are not unmindful that in a suit to
enjoin shipment of allegedly contaminated
corn, itappears that FDA would be obliged

9.thatBostontheFarmCenter could be read to indicate
mere generalFifthstatementsCircuitviewedofpolicy.actio
ing the Government's argument that a court
should defer to the action level as positively
indicating a violation of the Act, the Boston
Farm Center court noted that "[t]he deference
principle is less compelling when the agency
threshold isrule-making.”amatterofprosecutorialdiscret
seeinsteadUnitedof v. Ewig590Bros.,F.2dat 149. 715,Bu
725 (7th Cir.1974)States(Anactionlevel502isF.2d
operate more like a rule of general applicability"me
than a mere prediction of how the agency
would choose to exercise itsprosecutorial discre
cer­ t. denied, 420 U.S. 945, 95 S.Ct.
1324, 43 L.Ed.2d 423 (1975). We may well
to prove that the corn is “adulterated,”
within the meaning of the FDC Act, rather
than merely prove non-compliance with the
action level. See United States v. Boston
Farm Center, Inc., 590 F.2d 149, 151 (5th
Cir.1979).9 The action level thus does not
bind food producers in the sense that pro-
ducers are automatically subject to enforce-
ment proceedings for violating the action
level. This factor, accordingly, points in
favor of the agency’s characterization.
But the fact that action levels do not com-
pletely bind food producers as would a
more classic legislative rule (where the
only issue before the court would be if the
agency rule were in fact violated) is not
determinative of the issue. For here, we
are convinced that FDA has bound itself.
As FDA conceded at oral argument, it
would be daunting indeed to try to convince
a court that the agency could appropriately
prosecute a producer for shipping corn
with less than 20 ppb aflatoxin. And this
type of cabining of an agency’sprosecutori-
al discretion can in fact rise to the level of
a substantive, legislative rule. Cf. Nader
v. CAB, 657 F.2d 453 (D.C.Cir.1981);
Guardian Federal, 589 F.2d at 666-67 (“If
it appears that a so-called policy statement
is in purpose or likely effect one that nar-
rowly limits administrative discretion, it
will be taken for what it is— a binding rule
of substantive law.”) (emphasis added).
That is exactly what has happened here.
In sum, consideration of a variety of
factors leads us to conclude that the FDA’s
action levels are not within the section
553(b)(3)(A) exception to notice-and-com-
ment requirements.10 Since all agree that

prefer the Seventh Circuit's characterization,
nInlevelsreview­asbutneithercourtwasaddressingtheissuebe-
fore us: whether action levels are within the
interpretative rules/general statements of policy
exceptionThus,toAPA notice-and-comment require-
ments. these casual characterizations are
of limited help in our inquiry.
ion10. Our conclusion isbuttressed by the Supreme
t Court's opinion in this case, which could be
read to reflect an understanding of the action
anttolevels as substantive rules. Specifically, the
Court described action levels in the following
tion.”),terms:"Insetting an action level, the FDA es-
sentially assures food producers that itordinari-
ly will not enforce the general adulteration pro-

those procedures were not followed, the
action level at issue here cannot stand.
We pause to observe that nothing in our
decision today generally precludes FDA
from proceeding by way of informal action
levels. The Supreme Court has, of course,
decided that such a course is permissible
under the FDC Act. Our limited holding is
that the current action levels are treated as
substantive rules by FDA and, as such, can
only be permitted if notice-and-comment
procedures are employed. If itso chooses,
FDA could proceed by action levels that
are pure policystatements. But in order to
do so, FDA must avoid giving action levels
the kind of substantive significance that it
now so plainly attaches to them.
We add one additional caveat. Our hold-
ing today in no way indicates that agencies
develop written guidelines to aid their exer-
cise of discretion only at the peril of having
a court transmogrify those guidelines into
binding norms. We recognize that such
guidelines have the not inconsiderable ben-
efits of apprising the regulated community
of the agency’s intentions as well as in-
forming the exercise of discretion by
agents and officers in the field. It is be-
yond question that many such statements
are non-binding in nature and would thus
be characterized by a court as interpreta-
tive rules or policy statements. We are
persuaded that courts will appropriately
reach an opposite conclusion only where, as
here, the agency itself has given its rules
substantive effect.
In sum, our holding today is narrow.
We conclude that in the circumstances of
this case, FDA by virtue of its own course
of conduct has chosen to limit its discretion
and promulgated action levels which it
gives a present, binding effect. Having
accorded such substantive significance to
action levels, FDA iscompelled by the APA
to utilize notice-and-comment procedures in
promulgating them.

II
The FDA has, on several occasions,
granted exemptions to permit the blending

visions of the Act against them.” 106 S.Ct. at
2363. This characterization of the action levels
as an agency assurance is consistent with our
949

of contaminated com with uncontaminated
corn. See, e.g., 43 Fed.Reg. 14,122 (1978),
reprinted in J.A. at 41. This blending is
typically permitted to help food producers
cope with seasonal weather variations
which may result in a particular harvest
yielding com with a higher level of aflatox-
in. See Supplementary Brief of the State
of South Carolina as Amicus Curiae in Sup-
port of Appellee at 1-4. In such circum-
stances, the FDA may permit blending to
bring the total levelof aflatoxin contamina-
tion in the final, blended corn within accept-
able levels.

CNI contends that this blending
practice causes the final product to be
“adulterated” within the meaning of 21
U.S.C. § 342(a)(2)(A). This section reads,
in relevant part, as follows:
A food shall be deemed to be adulterated
—... if it bears or contains any added
poisonous or added deleterious substance
... which is unsafe within the meaning
of section 346 of this title.
Section 346, in turn, states that

[a]ny poisonous or deleterious substance
added to any food, except where such
substance ... cannot be avoided ...
shall be deemed to be unsafe for pur-
poses of the application of clause (2)(A)
of section 342(a).
21 U.S.C. § 346. The intentional blending
of contaminated com obviously cannot in
reason be considered unavoidable. Surely
there can be little doubt that blended com
therefore stands branded as “adulterated”
for purposes of the FDC Act; indeed, in its
initial brief FDA conceded as much:
The Government does not dispute [CNI’s]
contention that use of an adulterated
feed as an ingredient in another feed
causes the finished (blended) feed to be
adulterated.

Brief for Appellee at 36. But as FDA goes
on to point out, a conclusion that a particu-
lar food product is “adulterated,” in the
abstract, means little other than that FDA

holding that the action levels are substantive
rulessubject to notice-and-comment procedures.

950

could choose to initiate enforcement pro-
ceedings. CNI does not, and could not,
point to any provision in the FDC Act re-
quiring FDA to initiate enforcement action
against every food falling within the Act’s
definition of “adulterated.” Rather, the
Act makes clear that these enforcement
decisions are vested, as they traditionally
are, with the agency. Section 336, for ex-
ample, expressly recognizes that FDA need
not “report for prosecution, or for the insti-
tution of libel or injunction proceedings,
minor violations of this [Act].” 21 U.S.C.
§ 336.
Upon analysis, therefore, the grava­
men of CNI’scomplaint is that FDA failed
to initiate enforcement proceedings. But
as the Supreme Court held in Heckler v.
Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 105 S.Ct. 1649, 84
L.Ed.2d 714 (1985), FDA enjoys complete
discretion not to employ the enforcement
provisions of the FDC Act, and those deci­
sions are not subject to judicial review. As
this court recently concluded, the “provi­
sions [of the FDC Act] authorize, but do
not compel the FDA to undertake enforce­
ment activity; they ‘commit complete dis­
cretion to the [FDA] to decide ”how and
when they should be exercised.’ Scher­
ing Corp. v. Heckler, 779 F.2d 683, 686
(D.C.Cir.1985)(quoting Heckler v. Chaney,
105 S.Ct. at 1658). In light of this princi­
ple, CNI’sarguments on the blending issue
must fall.
Ill

In conclusion, we find FDA’s action lev-
els to be invalid in that they were issued
without the requisite notice-and-comment
procedures, but we reject CNI’s challenge
to FDA’s disinclination to initiate enforce-
ment action against certain blended corn.
Accordingly, the case is remanded to the
District Court for further proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
STARR, Circuit Judge, concurring in
part and dissenting in part:

I fully concur in section II of the panel
opinion,holding that FDA’sdecision to per-
mit blending fell within the agency’s en-
forcement discretion. I am also persuaded
that the majority’s careful treatment of the
substantive rules-policy statements distinc-
tion is not unfaithful to the teachings of
this circuit’s more recent precedents.
Nonetheless, I am constrained to conclude
that the correct rule was that laid down by
our court thirteen years ago in Pacific Gas
& Electric Co. v. FPC, where we held:
The critical distinction between a sub-
stantive rule and a general statement of
policy is the different practical effect
that these two types of pronouncements
have in subsequent administrative pro-
ceedings____ A properly adopted sub-
stantive rule establishes a standard of
conduct which has the force of law.
506 F.2d 33, 38 (D.C.Cir.1974). The Pacific
Gas-enunciated factor— whether the pro-
nouncement has the force of law in subse-
quent proceedings— should be deemed de-
terminative of the issue. Because there is
no doubt that the agency pronouncements
at issue here have no such effect, I respect-
fully dissent from section I of the panel
opinion.

I
The abiding characteristic of a legislative
rule is that itis law. It defines a standard
of conduct that regulated individuals or
entities ignore at their peril, in the face of
possible enforcement action. Significantly,
the only issue in any such proceeding is
whether the rule applies to the facts at
hand. “The underlying policy embodied in
the rule is not generally subject to chal-
lenge before the agency.” Id., at 38.
Before such rules are sanctioned one
would think that they should be carefully
crafted, with the “underlying polic[ies] em-
bodied in the rule” recognized, openly dis-
cussed, and deliberately weighed. To re-
turn to basic civics for a moment, statutes
passed by Congress have been refined in
this manner by the very nature of the
legislative process. Bills are considered by
committees, hearings are held, debate is
conducted, compromises are reached, and
votes are taken. And all this is carried on
in a bicameral legislative body with the
final result presented to the President for

his approval or rejection. See INS v. Cha-
dha, 462 U.S. 919, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 77
L.Ed.2d 317 (1983). A statute therefore
possesses important attributes justifying
placement of the coercive power of the
state behind a particular policy framed in
accordance with the process ordained at the
Founding.
In the modern administrative state, many
“laws” emanate not from Congress but
from administrative agencies, inasmuch as
Congress has seen fit to vest broad rule-­
making power in the executive branch, in­
cluding independent agencies. See Synar
v. United States, 626 F.Supp. 1374, 1383-­
84 (D.D.C.) (three judge court), aff'd, —
U.S.-, 106 S.Ct. 3181, 92 L.Ed.2d 583
(1986); K. Davis Administrative Law
Treatise § 3.8 (1982Supp.); cf. Ticor Title
Insurance Co. v. FTC, 814 F.2d 731, 732
(D.C.Cir.1987) (dismissing on procedural
grounds a challenge to the delegation of
law enforcement powers to an independent
agency). This rulemaking power is obvi-
ously cabined by whatever requirements
may exist in the particular statute delegat-
ing rulemaking authority, a subject which
we treated in our initial decision in this
case. See 757 F.2d 354 (D.C.Cir.1985).
But Congress has also provided in the APA
for certain procedural protections before
that which achieves the lofty status of
“law” is promulgated by an agency acting
in its Congressionally authorized lawmak-
ing capacity. Chief among these protec-
tions are the notice-and-comment require-
ments laid down in the familiar provision of
5 U.S.C. § 553. In a sense, notice-and-com-
ment procedures serve as a Congressional-
ly mandated proxy for the procedures
which Congress itself employs in fashion-
ing its “rules,” as itwere, thereby insuring
that agency “rules” are also carefully
crafted (with democratic values served by
public participation) and developed only af-
ter assessment of relevant considerations.
It is thus, in theory, important for APA
procedures to be followed before an agency
pronouncement is deemed a binding legisla-
tive rule not merely because the APA says
so, but because in saying so the APA is
1. In addition, the difficultycan be seen in at-
951

protecting a free people from the danger of
coercive state power undergirding pro­
nouncements that lack the essential attrib­
utes of deliberativeness present in statutes.
Because of the value inhering in such“ pro­
cedures, it is well-established that ‘only
reluctantly should” courts recognize excep­
tions therefrom.’ American Bus Associ­
ation v. United States, 627 F.2d 525, 528
(D.C.Cir.1980)(quoting Humana of South
Carolina v. Calif­ano, 590 F.2d 1070, 1082
(D.C.Cir.1978)).
Nonetheless, in crafting the APA, Con-
gress directed that courts should recognize
certain exceptions to the statute’s notice-
and-comment requirements. Specifically,
Congress recognized that not all agency
pronouncements, even those of considera-
ble moment, rise to the dignity of law.
Thus, the APA excepts, as the panel opin-
ion recounts, interpretative rules and gen-
eral statements of policy from the general
notice-and-comment requirements. While
itis no doubt true, and indeed is frequently
recognized, that such agency pronounce-
ments may have a direct effect on the
regulated community, and may even be ju-
dicially reviewable, see, e.g., AFL-CIO v.
Donovan, 757 F.2d 330, 341-43 (D.C.Cir.
1985); cf. Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner,
387 U.S. 136, 87 S.Ct. 1507, 18 L.Ed.2d 681
(1967),these pronouncements stilllack the
dignity of “law.” Before that status can
be achieved, the agency must run its poli-
cies through the notice-and-comment gant-
let. Perhaps in part because the agency
here has avoided testing its pronounce-
ments in this way, it must in any future
proceeding defend and justify its chosen
standard in the face of a challenge to that
standard. Cf. United States v. Boston
Farm Center, Inc., 590 F.2d 149, 151 (5th
Cir.1979).
II

The majority is quite correct when it
chronicles the difficulty courts have found
in attempting to fathom the distinction be-
tween legislative or substantive rules on
one hand, and interpretative rules or policy
statements on the other.1 Inasmuch as our
tempts by courts to quite understandably make

952

decisional law over the last decade avowed-
ly reflects considerable uncertainty in dis-
cerning the line between agency pro-
nouncements that are “law” and those that
are “policy,” see Majority Opinion at 946,
it seems advisable to return to the pris-
tine teaching of Pacific Gas. In that
case, this court articulated a rule which is
clearly preferable to the present muddy
state of the law. The wisdom of the Pacif-
ic Gas principle is in no small measure
found in the fact that the case reflects the
“core principles” which I sought briefly to
adumbrate in the preceding section of this
opinion. As I read the case, Pacific Gas
deems as “critical” the effect of the agency
pronouncement in future proceedings.
This is as it should be, for as I discussed
above, it is this element that is the essence
of “law.” Not only is the Pacific Gas
approach therefore the most principled
manner in which to draw the legislative-in-
terpretative line (in view of the fact that
the determination is whether a pronounce-
ment is “law” or not), but it has the not
insignificant practical benefit in an unclear
world of providing great clarity where pre-
viously there has been “considerable
smog.” See American Bus, 627 F.2d at
529.
We should reembrace our Pacific Gas
test as the determinative factor in analyz-
ing whether a particular pronouncement is
legislative or interpretative in nature. If
the pronouncement has the force of law in
future proceedings, it is a legislative rule.
Unless that critical feature is present, how-
ever, the agency statement should be con-
sidered to be a lower form of pronounce-
sense of this area by seeking simple, easily-ap-
pliedCo.,rules.In Brock v. Cathedral Bluffs Shale
Oil 796 F.2d 533, 539 (D.C.Cir.1986), now-
Justice Scalia intimates that "(t]he real dividing
point between regulations and general state-
ments of policy is publication in the Code of
Federal Regulations.” Such an approach would
certainly be simple, if arguably inconsistent
with the notion that the deference entitled to an
agency’sown characterizationsId.,ofits statements
is"not overwhelming.” at 537. Iprefer the
Pacific Gas approach, which has a much firmer
rooting in the core principles at issue.
2. I recognize that in many ways, nothing can be
"readily” demonstrated by the case at hand;
action levels, as the FDA has fashioned them,
ment, a “non-law” as it were, or in APA
terms an “interpretative rule” or “general
statement of policy.” The correct measure
of a pronouncement’s force in subsequent
proceedings is a practical one: must the
agency merely show that the pronounce-
ment has been violated or must the agency,
if its hand is called, show that the pro-
nouncement itself is justified in light of the
underlying statute and the facts.
Application of this test can readily be
illustrated by the case at hand.2 Action
levels offer guidance to the regulated com-
munity with respect to what products FDA
deems adulterated within the meaning of
the FDC Act. But in an enforcement pro-
ceeding in which FDA seeks either to im-
pose sanctions for shipment of an adul-
terated product or to enjoin shipment of an
adulterated product, the agency must
prove the product is “adulterated.” That
is, FDA cannot merely show that the prod-
uct at issue fails to comply with the
action
level. See Boston Farm Center, 590 F.2d
at 151. Rather, FDA must offer scientific
or other probative evidence to support its
contention that the product is adulterated.
Thus, the action level does not have the
force of law in the subsequent proceeding.
Indeed, it has no “force” at all.
Let me quickly observe that I am not
encouraging rebellion and sedition within
the circuit. While the law has certainly
evolved since Pacific Gas, at no point has
this court disavowed that decision.3 Quite
to the contrary, the leading case since Pa-
cific Gas, American Bus, expressly em-
braced the earlier decision. See 627F.2d at
are a rather curious hybrid. Under a function-
alist analysis, this form of agency action comes
tantalizingly close to a substantive rule. I find
particularly compelling the fact that FDA con-
siders it necessary to grant "exceptions" to its
action levels. See 21 C.F.R. § 109.8 (1986).
Thus, I must confess in candor that I view the
majority’s approach not only as faithful to our
circuit’s more recent pronouncements, but as
buttressed by common sanse.

3. What seems to have taken place as the law has
evolved (and arguably become obfuscated) is
that the Pacific Gas factor has been consigned to
a supporting role, as one aspect of what seems
to be a multi-factor test.

529. Moreover, post-American Bus deci-
sions grappling with the legislative rule-in-
terpretative rule distinction have often em-
phasized the Pacific Gas factor. Just the
other day, for example, Judge Bork, in
writing for the court in The National Lati-
no Media Coalition v. FCC, 816 F.2d 785,
788 (D.C.Cir.1987),emphasized that “an in-
terpretative rule does not have the force of
law and is not binding upon anyone” in
holding that the agency pronouncements at
issue there were not legislative rules and
thus not subject to the APA’s notice-and-
comment requirements. To my eye, this
represents an application, albeit not explic-
it, of Pacific Gas. Thus, I view Pacific
Gas as not only “good” law, in the sense
that it has never been overruled, but can
discern in our precedents examples, includ-
ing very fresh ones, of its being heartily
applied. I would therefore urge that the
“force of law” factor from Pacific Gas be
explicitly recognized anew as the polestar
guiding the legislative-interpretative deter-
mination. Such a modest step would not
only be faithful to fundamental principles
informing the nature of legislative rules
but would have the happy practical conse-
quence of bringing clarity to a troubled
area.
While I thus view this step as warranted,
I recognize a potential danger lurking in
the embrace of a single-factor, Pacific Gas
test. Agencies may yield to temptation
and seek to shield their regulations from
the scrutiny occasioned by notice-and-com-
ment procedures, choosing instead to cast
would-be regulations as interpretative
rules. The rule would still, of course, be
subject to scrutiny in a subsequent pro-
ceeding, but this fact may be of littlecom-
fort to prospective commentors, given the
deference accorded agency views in any
such proceedings. See generally Chevron
U.S.A. Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 104
S.Ct. 2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984). But
upon analysis, the danger is more theo-
retical than real. Indeed, Congress not
atypically provides agencies with a direct
command to promulgate regulations, cf,
e.g.,Industrial Union Department, AFL-
CIO v. American Petroleum Institute, 448
U.S. 607, 100 S.Ct. 2844, 65 L.Ed.2d 1010
953

(1980),thereby imposing a duty that would
not be satisfied with issuance of an humble
interpretative rule. In this case, of course,
the Supreme Court has now ruled that
FDA is not required by the organic statute
to issue formal regulations, but can instead
proceed by way of informal action levels.
— U.S. -, 106 S.Ct. 2360, 90 L.Ed.2d
959 (1986). But if Congress prefers a tra-
ditional model of command to the agencies
to issue regulations, it can embrace that
model through legislation, informed by the
need, reiterated by the Supreme Court in
this very case, to avoid dangling participles
and other forms of that omnipresent occu-
pational hazard of the draftsman’s work-
shop, ambiguity. But see INS v. Cardoza-
Fonseca, — U.S.-, 107 S.Ct. 1207, 94
L.Ed.2d 434 (1987); Board of Governors v.
Dimension Financial Corp., 474 U.S. 361,
106 S.Ct. 681, 88 L.Ed.2d 691 (1986). Be-
cause Pacific Gas, and the basic principles
upon which it stands, points the way to a
quite different result than that reached by
my colleagues, I am constrained to dissent
in part.








Eric J. BARNETT, individually and as
parent and next friend of Rachael
Lynn Barnett, a minor, Appellant,
v.

Caspar WEINBERGER, Secretary of De-
fense of the United States of America.
No. 81-2122.

United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.
Argued Sept. 27, 1982.
May 15,
Decided 1987.
As Amended May 15, 1987.