Department of Commerce v. New York — 588 U.S. 752 (2019) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/pdf/2019/06/27/department_of_commerce_v._new_york.pdf

(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2018 1 
 
Syllabus 
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is 
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.  
The syllabus constitutes no part of  the opinion of t he Court but has been 
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.  
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
Syllabus 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ET AL. v. NEW YORK 
ET AL. 
CERTIORARI BEFORE JUDGMENT TO THE UNITED STATES 
COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
No. 18–966. Argued April 23, 2019—Decided June 27, 2019 
In order to a pportion congressional representatives among the States , 
the Constitution requires an “Enumeration” of the population every 
10 years, to be made “in such Manner” as Congress “shall by Law d i-
rect,” Art. I, §2, cl. 3; Amdt. 14, §2.  In the Census Act, Congress de l-
egated to the Secretary of Commerce the task of conducting the d e-
cennial census “in such form and content as he may determine.”  13  
U. S. C. §141(a).  The Secretary is aided by the Census Bu reau, a sta-
tistical agency in the Depar tment of Commerce.  The populati on 
count is also used to allocate federal funds to the States and to draw 
electoral districts.  The census additionally serves as a means of co l-
lecting demographic information  used for a variety of purposes.  
There have been 23 decennial censuses since 1790.  All but one b e-
tween 1820 and 2000 asked at least some of the popu lation about 
their citizenship or place of birth.  T he question was asked of all 
households until 1950, and was asked of a fraction of the population 
on an alternative long -form questionnaire between 1960 and 2000 .  
In 2010, the citizenship question was moved from the census to the 
American Community Survey, which is sent  each year to  a small 
sample of households. 
  In March 2018, Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross announced in 
a memo that he had decided to reinstate a citizenship question on the 
2020 census questionnaire at the request of the Department of Ju s-
tice (DOJ), which sought census block level citizenship data to use in 
enforcing the Voting Rights Act  (VRA).  The Secretary’s memo ex-
plained that the Census Bureau initi ally analyzed, and the Secretary 
considered, three possible courses of action  before he chose a fourth 
option that combined two of the proposed options: reinstate a citize n-
2 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Syllabus 
ship question on the decennial census , and  use administrative re c-
ords from other age ncies, e.g., the Social Security Administration , to 
provide additional citizenship data .  The Secretary “carefully consi d-
ered” the possibility that reinstating a citizenship question would d e-
press the response rate , the long history of the citizenship ques tion 
on the census, and several other factors before concluding that “the 
need for accurate citizenship data and the limited burden of the ques-
tion” outweighed fears about a lower response rate.   
  Here, two separate suits filed in F ederal District Court in New 
York were consolidated: one filed by a group States, counties, cities, 
and others, alleging that the  Secretary’s decision violated the En u-
meration Clause and the requirements of the Administrative Proc e-
dure Act; the other filed by non-governmental organizations, adding 
an equal protection claim.  The District Court dismissed the En u-
meration Clause claim but allowed the other claims to proceed.  In 
June 2018, the Government submitted the Commerce Depart ment’s 
“administrative record”—materials that Secretary Ross considered in 
making his decision —including DOJ’s letter requesting reinstat e-
ment of the citizenship question.  Shortly thereafter, at DOJ’s urging, 
the Government supplemented the record with a new memo from the 
Secretary, which stated that he had begun considering the addition of 
a citizenship question in early 2017  and had asked whether DOJ 
would formally request its inclusion.  Arguing that the supplemental 
memo indicated that the record was incomplete, respondents asked 
the District Court to compel the Government to complete the admi n-
istrative record.  The court granted that request, and the parties 
jointly stipulated to the inclusion of additional materials that co n-
firmed that the Secretary and his staff began exploring reinstate-
ment of a citizenship question shortly after his 2017 confirmation, at-
tempted to elicit requests for citizenship data from other agencies, 
and eventually persuaded DOJ to make the request .  The court also 
authorized disco very outside the administrative record , includ ing 
compelling a deposition  of Secretary Ross , which this Court stayed 
pending further review .  After a bench trial, the District Court d e-
termined that respondents had standing to sue.  On the merits, it  
ruled that the Secretary’s action was arbitrary and capricious , based 
on a pretextual rationale,  and violated the Census Act, and held that 
respondents had failed to show an equal protection violation. 
Held: 
 1. At least some respondents have Article III standing.  For a legal 
dispute to qualify as a genuine case or controversy, at least one plain-
tiff must “present an injury that is concrete, particularized, and act u-
al or imminent; fairly traceable to the defendant’s challenged behav-
ior; and likely to be redressed by a favorable ruling.”  Davis v. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 3 
 
Syllabus 
Federal Election Comm’n, 554 U. S. 724, 733.  The District Court con-
cluded that the evidence at trial established a sufficient likelihood 
that reinstating a citizenship question would result in noncitizen 
households responding to the census at lower rates than other  
groups, which would cause them to be undercounted and lead to 
many of the injuries respondents asserted—diminishment of political 
representation, loss of federal funds, degradation of census d ata, and 
diversion of resources.  For purposes of standing, the se findings of 
fact were not so suspect as to be clearly erroneous.   Several state r e-
spondents have shown that if noncitizen households are undercoun t-
ed by as little as 2% , they will lose out on federal funds that are di s-
tributed on the basis of state popu lation.  That is a sufficiently 
concrete and imminent injury to satisfy Article III, and there is no 
dispute that a ruling in favor of respondents would redress that 
harm.  Pp. 8–11. 
 2. The Enumera tion Clause permits Congress, and by extension 
the Secreta ry, to inquire about citizenship on the census questio n-
naire.  That conclusion follows from  Congress’s broad authority over 
the census, as informed by long and consistent historical practice that 
“has been open, widespread, and unchallenged since the early  days of 
the Republic.”  NLRB v. Noel Canning, 573 U. S. 513, 572 (Scalia, J., 
concurring in judgment).  Pp. 11–13. 
  3. The Secretary’s decision is reviewable under the Administrative 
Procedure Act.  The APA instructs reviewing courts to set aside agen-
cy action that is “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or ot h-
erwise not in accordance with law,” 5  U. S. C. § 706(2)(A), but it 
makes review unavailable  “to the extent that” the agency action is 
“committed to agency discretion by law,” §701(a)(2).  The Census Act 
confers broad authority on the Secretary, but it does  not leave his 
discretion unbounded.  The §701(a)(2) exception is generally limited 
to “certain categories of administrative decisions that courts trad i-
tionally have regarded as ‘committed  to agency discretion,’ ” Lincoln 
v. Vigil, 508 U.  S. 182, 191.  The taking of the census is not one of 
those areas.  Nor is the statute drawn so that it furnishes no mean-
ingful standard by which to judge the Secretary’s action , which is 
amenable to review  for compliance with several Census Act provi-
sions according to the general requirements of reasoned agency dec i-
sionmaking.  Because this is not a case in which there is “no law to 
apply,” Citizens to Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U. S. 402, 
410, the Secretary’s decision is subject to judicial review.  Pp. 13–16. 
 4. The Secretary’s decision was supported by the evidence before 
him.  He examined the Bureau’s analysis of various ways to collect 
improved citizenship data and explained why he thought the best 
course was to both reinstate a citizenship question and use citize n-
4 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Syllabus 
ship data from administrative records to fill in the gaps.  He then 
weighed the value of obtaining more complete and accurate citize n-
ship data against the uncertain risk  that reinstating a citizenship 
question would result in a materially lower response rate, and e x-
plained why he thought the benefits of his approach outweighed the 
risk.  That decision was reasonable and reasonably explained, parti c-
ularly in light of the l ong history of the citizenship question on the 
census.  Pp. 16–20. 
 5. The District Court also erred in ruling that the Secretary viola t-
ed two particular provisions of the Census Act, §6(c) and §141(f ).  
Section 6 ’s first two subsections authorize the Secretary to acquire 
administrative records from other federal agencies and state and l o-
cal governments , while s ubsection (c) requires the Secretary, to the 
maximum extent possible, to use that information “ instead of co n-
ducting direct inquiries.”  Assuming that §6(c) applies, the Secretary 
complied with it for essentially the same reasons that his decision 
was not arbitrary an d capricious: A dministrative records would not, 
in his judgment, provide the more complete and accurate data that 
DOJ so ught.  The Secretary also complied with §1 41(f ), which re-
quires him to make a series of reports to Congress about his plans for 
the census .  And even if he had violated that provision, the error 
would be harmless because he  fully informed C ongress of, and ex-
plained, his decision.  Pp. 20–23. 
 6. In order to permit meaningful j udicial review, an agency must 
“ ‘disclose the basis’  ” of its action.  Burlington Truck Lines,  Inc. v. 
United States, 371 U. S. 156, 167–169.  A  court is ordinarily limited 
to evaluating the agency’s contemporaneous explanation in light of 
the existing administrative record , Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power 
Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 435 U. S. 519, but it 
may inquire into “the m ental processes o f administrative dec i-
sionmakers” upon a “strong showing of  bad faith or improper beha v-
ior,” Overton Park, 401 U. S., at 420.  While the District Court pre - 
maturely invoked that exception in ordering extra -record discovery 
here, it was ult imately justified in light of the expanded administr a-
tive record.  Accordingly, the District Court’s ruling on pretext will be 
reviewed in light of all the evidence in the record, including the extra-
record discovery. 
 It is hardly improper for an agency h ead to come into office with 
policy preferences and ideas, discuss them with affected parties, 
sound out other agencies for support, and work with staff attorneys 
to substantiate the legal basis for a preferred po licy.  Yet viewing the 
evidence as a whole,  this Court shares the District Court’s conviction 
that the decision to reinstate a citizenship question cannot adequat e-
ly be explained in terms of DOJ’s request for improved citizenship 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 5 
 
Syllabus 
data to better enforce the VRA.  Several points, taken together, r e-
veal a significant mismatch between the Secretary’s decision and the 
rationale he provided.  The record shows that he began taking steps 
to reinstate the question a week into his tenure, but gives no hint  
that he was considering VRA enforcement .  His directo r of policy a t-
tempted to elicit requests for citizenship data from the Department of 
Homeland Security and DOJ’s Office of Immigration Review before 
turning to the VRA rationale and DOJ’s Civil Rights Division.  For its 
part, DOJ’s actions suggest that it was more interested in helping the 
Commerce Department than in securing the data.  Altogether, the ev-
idence tells a story that does not match the Secretary’s explanation 
for his decision.  Unlike a typical case in which an agency may have 
both stated and u nstated reasons for a decision, here the VRA en-
forcement rationale—the sole stated reason—seems to have been con-
trived.  The reasoned explanation requirement of administrative law  
is meant to ensure that agencies offer genuine justifications for i m-
portant decisions, reasons that can be scrutinized by courts and the 
interested public.  The explanation provided here was more of a di s-
traction.  In these unusual circumstances, the District Court was 
warranted in remanding to the agency.  See Florida Power & Light 
Co. v. Lorion, 470 U. S. 729, 744.  Pp. 23–28. 
351 F. Supp. 3d 502, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded. 
 ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court with 
respect to Parts I and II, and the opinion of the Court with respect to 
Parts III, IV–B, and IV–C, in which THOMAS, ALITO, GORSUCH, and KAV- 
ANAUGH, JJ., joined; with respect to Part IV –A, in which T HOMAS, 
GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, and KAVANAUGH, JJ., joined; 
and with respect to Part V , in which G INSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, 
and KAGAN, JJ., joined.  THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part 
and dissenting in part, in which GORSUCH and KAVANAUGH, JJ., joined.  
BREYER, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, 
in which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.  ALITO, J., filed 
an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 1 
 
Opinion of the Court 
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the 
preliminary print of the United States Reports.  Readers are requested to 
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash -
ington, D.  C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order 
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.  
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 18–966 
_________________ 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. NEW YORK, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI BEFORE JUDGMENT TO THE UNITED 
STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
[June 27, 2019] 
 CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
 The Secretary of Commerce decided to reinstate a que s-
tion about citizenship on the 2020 census questionnaire.  
A group of plaintiffs challenged that decision on constit u-
tional and statutory grounds.  We now decide whether the 
Secretary violated the Enumeration Clause of the Const i-
tution, the Census Act, or otherwise abused his discretion. 
I 
A 
 In order to apportion Members of the House of Repr e-
sentatives among the S tates, the Constitution requires an 
“Enumeration” of the population every 10 years, to be 
made “in such Manner” as Congress “shall  by Law direct.”  
Art. I, §2, cl. 3; Amdt. 14, §2.  In the Census Act, Congress 
delegated to the Secretary of Commerce the task of co n-
ducting the decennial census “in such form and content as 
he may determine.”  13 U.  S. C. §141(a).  The Secretary is 
aided in that task by the Census Bureau, a statistical 
agency housed within the Departm ent of Commerce.  See 
§§2, 21. 
2 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
 The population count derived from the census is used 
not only to apportion representatives but also to allocate 
federal funds to the States an d to draw electoral districts.  
Wisconsin v. City of New York , 517 U.  S. 1, 5 –6 (1996).  
The census additionally serves as a means of collecting 
demographic information, which “is used for such varied 
purposes as computing federal grant-in-aid benefits, draft-
ing of legislation, urban and regional planning, business 
planning, and academic and social studies.”  Baldrige v. 
Shapiro, 455 U.  S. 345, 353– 354, n. 9 (1982).  Over the 
years, the census has asked questions about (for example ) 
race, sex, age, health, education , occupation, housing, and 
military service.  It has also asked about radio ownership, 
age at first marriage, and native tongue .  The Census Act 
obliges everyone to answer census questions truthfully 
and requires the Secretary to keep individual a nswers 
confidential, including from other Government agencies .  
§§221, 8(b), 9(a). 
 There have been 23 decennial censuses from the first 
census in 1790 to the most recent in 2010.  Every census 
between 1820 and 2000 (with the exception of 1840) asked 
at least some of the population about their citizenship or 
place of birth .  Between 1820 and 1950, the question was 
asked of all households.  Between 1960 and 2000, it was 
asked of about one -fourth to one -sixth of the population.  
That change was part of a larg er effort to simplify the 
census by asking most people a few basic demographic 
questions (such as sex, age, race, and marital status) on a 
short-form questionnaire, while asking a sample of the 
population more detailed demographic questions on a 
long-form questionnaire.  In explaining the decision to 
move the citizenship question to the long -form questio n-
naire, the Census Bureau opined that “general census 
information on citizenship had become of less importance 
compared with other possible questions to be included in 
the census, particularly in view of the recent statutory 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 3 
 
Opinion of the Court 
requirement for annual alien registration which could 
provide the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the 
principal user of such data, with the information it needed.”  
Dept. of Comme rce, Bureau of Census, 1960 Censuses o f 
Population and Housing 194 (1966).1 
 In 2010, the year of the latest census, the format 
changed again.  All households received the same que s-
tionnaire, which asked about sex, age, race, Hispanic 
origin, and living arrangements.  The more detailed demo-
graphic questions previously asked on the long -form ques-
tionnaire, including the question about citizenship, were 
instead asked in the American Community Survey (or 
ACS), which is sent each year to a rotating sample of 
about 2.6% of households. 
 The Census Bureau and former Bureau officials have 
resisted occasional proposals to resume asking a citizen-
ship question of everyone, on the ground that doing so 
would discourage noncitizens from responding to the 
census and lead to a less accurate count of the total popu-
lation.  See, e.g., Federation of Am. Immigration Reform v. 
Klutznick, 486 F.  Supp. 564, 568 ( DC 1980) (“[A]ccording 
to the Bureau[,] any effort to ascertain citizenship will 
inevitably jeopardize the overall accuracy of the popula-
tion count”); Brief for Former Directors of the U. S. Census 
Bureau as Amici Curiae in Evenwel v. Abbott, O. T. 2014, 
No. 14–940, p. 25 (inquiring about citizenship would “i n-
variably lead to a lower response rate”). 
B 
 In March 2018, Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross 
announced in a memo that he had decided to reinst ate a 
question about citizenship on the 2020 decennial census 
questionnaire.  The Secretary stated that he was acting at 
—————— 
1 The annual alien registration requirement was repealed in 1981.  
See §11, 95 Stat. 1617 (1981). 
4 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
the request of the Department of Justice  (DOJ), which 
sought improved data about citizen voting -age population 
for purposes of enforcing the Voting Rights Act (or VRA)—
specifically the Act’s ban on diluting the influence of m i-
nority voters by depriving them of single- member districts 
in which they can elect their preferred candidates.  App. to 
Pet. for Cert. 548a.  DOJ explained that fede ral courts 
determine whether a minority group could constitute a 
majority in a particular district by looking to the citizen 
voting-age population of the group.  According to DOJ, the 
existing citizenship data from the American Community 
Survey was not ide al: It was not reported at the level of 
the census block, the basic component of legislative dis-
tricting plans; it had substantial margins of error; and it 
did not align in time with the census -based population 
counts used to draw legislative districts.  D OJ therefore 
formally requested reinstatement of the citizenship que s-
tion on the census questionnaire.  Id., at 565a–569a. 
 The Secretary’s memo explained  that the Census B u-
reau initially analyzed, and the Secretary considered, 
three possible courses of ac tion.  The first was to continue 
to collect citizenship information in the American Com-
munity Survey and attempt to develop a data model that 
would more accurately estimate citizenship at the census 
block level.  The Secretary rejected that option because the 
Bureau “did not assert and could not confirm” that such 
ACS-based data modeling was possible “with a sufficient 
degree of accuracy.”  Id., at 551a. 
 The second option was to reinstate a citizenship ques-
tion on the decennial census.  The Bureau predicte d that 
doing so would discourage some noncitizens from respond-
ing to the census .  That would necessitate increased “non-
response follow up” operations —procedures the Bureau 
uses to attempt to count people who have not responded to 
the census—and potentially lead  to a less accurate count 
of the total population. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 5 
 
Opinion of the Court 
 Option three was to use administrative records from 
other agencies, such as the Social Security Administration 
and Citizenship and Immigration Services, to provide DOJ 
with citizenship data.  The Census Bureau recommended 
this option, and the Secretary found it a “potentially a p-
pealing solution” because the Bureau has long used a d-
ministrative records to supplement and improve census 
data.  Id. , at 554a.  But t he Secretary concluded that  
administrative records alone were inadequate because 
they were missing for more than 10% of the population. 
 The Secretary ultimately asked the Census Bureau to 
develop a fourth option that would combine options two 
and three: reinstate a citizenship ques tion on the census 
questionnaire, and also use the time remaining until the 
2020 census to “further enhance” the Bureau’s “admini s-
trative record data sets, protocols, and statistical models.”  
Id., at 555a.  The memo explained that, in the Secretary’s 
judgment, the fourth option would provide DOJ with the 
“most complete and accurate” citizen voting -age popul a-
tion data in response to its request.  Id., at 556a. 
 The Secretary “carefully considered” the possibility  
that reinstating a citizenship question woul d depress  
the response rate.  Ibid.  But after evaluating the  
Bureau’s “limited empirical evidence” on the question— 
evidence drawn from estimated non -response rates to 
previous American Community Surveys and census  
questionnaires—the Secretary concluded that it was not 
possible to “determine definitively” whether inquiring 
about citizenship in the census would materially affect 
response rates.  Id., at 557a, 562a.  He also noted the long 
history of the citizenship question on the census, as well 
as the fac ts that the United Nations recommends collect-
ing census-based citizenship information, and other major 
democracies such as Australia, Canada, France, Indonesia, 
Ireland, Germany, Mexico, Spain, and the United Kingdom 
inquire about citizenship in their cens uses.  Altogether, 
6 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
the Secretary determined that “the need for accurate 
citizenship data and the limited burden that the rei n-
statement of the citizenship question would impose ou t-
weigh fears about a potentially lower response rate.”  Id., 
at 557a. 
C 
 Shortly after the Secretary announced his decision, two 
groups of plaintiffs filed suit in Federal District Court in 
New York, challenging the decision on several grounds.  
The first group of plaintiffs included 18 States, the District 
of Columbia, various coun ties and cities, and the United 
States Conference of Mayors.  They alleged that the Secre-
tary’s decision violated the Enumeration Clause of the 
Constitution and the requirements of the Administrative 
Procedure Act.  The second group of plaintiffs consisted  of 
several non -governmental organizations that work with 
immigrant and minority communities.  They added an 
equal protection claim.  The District Court consolidated 
the two cases.  Both groups of plaintiffs are respondents 
here. 
 The Government moved to dismiss the lawsuits, arguing 
that the Secretary’s decision was unreviewable and that 
respondents had failed to state cognizable claims under 
the Enumeration Clause and the Equal Protection Clause.  
The District Court dismissed the Enumeration Clause 
claim but allowed the other claims to proceed.  315 F. 
Supp. 3d 766 (SDNY 2018). 
 In June 2018, the Government submitted to the District 
Court the Commerce Department’s “administrative re c-
ord”: the materials that Secretary Ross considered in 
making his decision.   That record included DOJ’s Dece m-
ber 2017 letter requesting reinstatement of the citizenship 
question, as well as several memos from the Census B u-
reau analyzing the predicted effects of reinstating the 
question.  Shortly thereafter, at DOJ’s urging, the G ov-
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 7 
 
Opinion of the Court 
ernment supplemented the record with a new memo from 
the Secretary, “intended to provide further background 
and context regarding” his March 2018 memo.  App. to 
Pet. for Cert. 546a.  The supplemental memo stated that 
the Secretary had begun considering whether to add the 
citizenship question in early 2017, and had inquired 
whether DOJ “would support, and if so would request, 
inclusion of a citizenship question as consistent with  and 
useful for enforcement of the Voting Rights Act.”  Ibid.   
According to the Secretary, DOJ “formally” requested 
reinstatement of the citizenship question after that in-
quiry.  Ibid. 
 Respondents argued that the supplemental memo indi-
cated that the Government had submitted an incomplete 
record of the materials considered by the Secretary.  They 
asked the District Court to compel the Government to 
complete the administrative record.  The court granted 
that request, and the parties jointly stipulated t o the 
inclusion of more than 12,000 pages of additional mater i-
als in the administrative record.  Among those materials 
were emails and other records confirming that the Secre-
tary and his staff began exploring the possibility of rei n-
stating a citizenship qu estion shortly after he was con-
firmed in early 2017, attempted to elicit requests for 
citizenship data from other agencies, and eventually pe r-
suaded DOJ to request reinstatement of the question for 
VRA enforcement purposes. 
 In addition, respondents asked the court to authorize 
discovery outside the administrative record.  They claimed 
that such an unusual step was warranted because they 
had made a strong preliminary showing that the Secretary 
had acted in bad faith.  See Citizens to Preserve Overton  
Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.  S. 402, 420 (1971).  The court 
also granted that request, authorizing expert discovery 
and depositions of certain DOJ and Commerce Depart-
ment officials. 
8 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
 In August and September 2018, the District Court 
issued orders compelling depositions of Secretary Ross and 
of the Acting Assistant Attorney General for DOJ’s Civil 
Rights Division.  We granted the Government’s request to 
stay the Secretary’s deposition pending further review, but 
we declined to stay the Acting AAG’s deposition or the  
other extra -record discovery that the District Court had 
authorized. 
 The District Court held a bench trial and issued findings 
of fact and conclusions of law on respondents’ statutory 
and equal protection claims.  After determining that re-
spondents had s tanding to sue, the District Court ruled 
that the Secretary’s action was arbitrary and capricious, 
based on a pretextual rationale, and violated certain 
provisions of the Census Act.  On the equal protection 
claim, however, the District Court concluded tha t re-
spondents had not met their burden of showing that the 
Secretary was motivated by discriminatory animus.  The 
court granted judgment to respondents on their statutory 
claims, vacated the Secretary’s decision, and enjoined him 
from reinstating the citiz enship question until he cured 
the legal errors the court had identified.  351 F.  Supp. 3d 
502 (SDNY 2019). 
 The Government appealed to the Second Circuit, but 
also filed a petition for writ of certiorari before judgment, 
asking this Court to review the Di strict Court’s decision 
directly because the case involved an issue of imperative 
public importance, and the census questionnaire needed to 
be finalized for printing by the end of June 2019.  We 
granted the petition.  586 U.  S. ___ (2019).  At the Go v-
ernment’s request, we later ordered the parties to address  
whether the Enumeration Clause provided an alternative 
basis to affirm.  586 U. S. ___ (2019). 
II 
 We begin with jurisdiction.  Article III of the Constit u-
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 9 
 
Opinion of the Court 
tion limits federal courts to deciding “Cases” and “Contr o-
versies.”  For a legal dispute to qualify as a genuine case 
or controversy, at least one plaintiff must have standing to 
sue.  The doctrine of standing “limits the category of lit i-
gants empowered to maintain a lawsuit in federal court to 
seek re dress for a legal wrong” and “confines the federal 
courts to a properly judicial role.”  Spokeo , Inc. v. Robins, 
578 U. S. ___, ___ (2016) (slip op., at 6).  To have standing, 
a plaintiff must “present an injury that is concrete, parti c-
ularized, and actual  or imminent; fairly traceable to the 
defendant’s challenged behavior; and likely to be r e-
dressed by a favorable ruling.”  Davis v. Federal Election 
Comm’n, 554 U. S. 724, 733 (2008). 
 Respondents assert a number of injuries—diminishment 
of political representation, loss of federal funds, degrad a-
tion of census dat a, and diversion of resources —all of 
which turn on their expectation that reinstating a citize n-
ship question will depress the census response rate and 
lead to an inaccurate population count.  Several States 
with a disproportionate share of noncitizens, for example, 
anticipate losing a seat in Congress or qualifying for less 
federal funding if their populations are undercounted.  
These are primarily future injuries, which “may suffice if 
the threatened injury is certainly impending, or there is a 
substantial risk that the harm will occur.”  Susan B. 
Anthony List v. Driehaus, 573 U. S. 149, 158 (2014) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). 
 The District Court concluded that the evidence at trial 
established a sufficient likelihood that the reinstatement 
of a citizenship question would result in noncitizen hous e-
holds responding to the census at lower rates than other 
groups, which in turn would cause them to be undercounted 
and lead to many of respondents’ asserted injuries.  For  
purposes of standing, these findings of fact  were not so 
suspect as to be clearly erroneous. 
 We therefore agree that at least some respondents have 
10 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
Article III standing.  Several state respondents here have 
shown that if nonci tizen households are undercounted by 
as little as 2% —lower than the District Court’s 5.8% pre-
diction—they will  lose out on federal funds that are di s-
tributed on the basis of state population.  That is a suff i-
ciently concrete and imminent injury to satisfy Article III, 
and there is no dispute that a ruling in favor of respond-
ents would redress that harm. 
 The Government contends, however, that any harm to 
respondents is not fairly traceable to the Secretary’s deci-
sion, because such harm  depends on the indepe ndent 
action of third parties choosing to violate their legal duty 
to respond to the census.  The chain of causation is made 
even more tenuous, the G overnment argues, by the fact 
that such intervening, unlawful third -party action would 
be motivated by unfo unded fears that the F ederal Gov-
ernment will itself break the law by using noncitizens’ 
answers against them for law enforcement purposes.  The 
Government invokes our steady refusal to “endorse stan d-
ing theories that rest on speculation about the decisions  of 
independent actors,” Clapper v. Amnesty Int’l USA, 568 
U. S. 398, 414 (2013), particularly speculation about  
future unlawful conduct, Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.  S. 
95, 105 (1983). 
 But we are satisfied that, in these circumstances, re-
spondents have m et their burden of showing that third 
parties will likely react in predictable ways to the citizen-
ship question, even if they do so unlawfully and despite 
the requirement that the Government keep individual 
answers confidential.  The evidence at trial esta blished 
that noncitizen households have historically respond ed to 
the census at lower  rates than other groups, and the Dis-
trict Court did not clearly err in crediting the Census 
Bureau’s theory that the discrepancy  is likely attributable 
at least in part t o noncitizens’ reluctance to answer a 
citizenship question.  Respondents’ theory of standing 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 11 
 
Opinion of the Court 
thus does not rest on mere speculation about the decisions 
of third parties; it relies instead on the predictable effect of 
Government action on the decisions of t hird parties.  Cf. 
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.  S. 154, 169– 170 (1997); Davis, 
554 U.  S., at 7 34–735.  Because Article III “requires no 
more than de  facto causality,” Block v. Meese, 793 F.  2d 
1303, 1309 (CADC 1986) (Scalia, J.), traceability is sati s-
fied here.  We may therefore consider the merits of r e-
spondents’ claims, at least as far as the Constitution is 
concerned. 
III 
 The Enumeration Clause of the C onstitution does not 
provide a basis to set aside the Secretary’s decision .  The 
text of that clause “vests Congress with virtually unli m-
ited discretion in conducting the decennial ‘actual En u-
meration,’ ” and Congress “has delegated its broad authority 
over the census to the Secretary.”  Wisconsin, 517 U. S., at 
19.  Given that expansive grant of authority, we have 
rejected challenges to the conduct of the census where the 
Secretary’s decisions bore a “reasonable relationship to the 
accomplishment of an actual enumeration.”  Id., at 20. 
 Respondents ask us to evaluate the Secretary’s decision 
to reinstate a citizenship question under that “reasonable 
relationship” standard, but we agree with the District 
Court that a different analysis is needed here.  Our cases 
applying that standard  concerned decisions about the 
population count itself—such as a post census decision not 
to use a particular method to adjust an undercount, id., at 
4, and a decision to allocate overseas military personnel to 
their home States, Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505 U.  S. 
788, 790–791 (1992).  We have never applied the standard 
to decisions about what kinds of demographic information 
to collect in the course of taking the census.  Indeed, as the 
District Court recognized, applying the “reasonable rela-
tionship” standard to every census-related decision “would 
12 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
lead to the conclusion that it is unconstitutional to ask any 
demographic question on the census” because “asking such 
questions bears no relationship whatsoever to the goal of 
an accurate headcount.”  315 F. Supp. 3d, at 804–805.  Yet 
demographic questions have been asked in every census 
since 1790, and questions about citizenship in particular 
have been asked for nearly as long.  Like the District 
Court, we decline respondents’ invitation to measure the 
constitutionality of the citizenship question by a stand - 
ard that would seem to render every census since 1790 
unconstitutional. 
 We look instead to Congress’s broad authority over the 
census, as informed by long and consistent historical 
practice.  All three b ranches of Government have unde r-
stood the Constitution to allow Congress, and by extension 
the Secretary, to use the census for more than simply 
counting the population.  Since 1790, Congress has sought, 
or permitted the Secretary to seek, information about 
matters as varied as age, sex, marital status, health, 
trade, profession, literacy, and value of real estate owned.  
See id., at 801.  Since 1820, it has sought, or permitted the 
Secretary to seek, information abou t citizenship in parti c-
ular.  Federal courts have approved the practice of collect-
ing demographic data in the census.  See, e.g., United 
States v. Moriarity, 106 F. 886, 891 (CC SDNY 1901) (duty 
to take a census of population “does not prohibit the gat h-
ering of other statistics, if ‘ necessary and proper,’ for the 
intelligent exercise of other powers enumerated in the 
constitution”).  While we have never faced the question 
directly, we have assumed that Congress has the power to 
use the census for information -gathering purposes, see 
Legal Tender Cases, 12 Wall. 457, 536 (1871), and we have 
recognized the role of the census as a “linchpin of the 
federal statistical system by collecting data on the chara c-
teristics of individuals, households, and housing units 
throughout the country,” Dep artment of Commerce  v. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 13 
 
Opinion of the Court 
United States House of Representatives, 525 U. S. 316, 341 
(1999) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
 That history matters.  Here, as in other areas, our  
interpretation of the Constitution is guided by a G overn-
ment practice that “has been open, widespread, and u n-
challenged since the early days of the Republic.”  NLRB  v. 
Noel Canning , 573 U.  S. 513, 572 (2014) (Scalia, J., co n-
curring in judgment); see also Wisconsin , 517 U.  S., at 21 
(noting “importance of h istorical practice” in census co n-
text).  In ligh t of the early understanding of  and long 
practice under the Enumeration Clause, we conclude that 
it permits Congress, and by extension the Secretary, to 
inquire about citizenship on the census questionnaire.  We 
need not, and do not, decide the constitutionality of any 
other question that Congress or the Secretary might de-
cide to include in the census. 
IV 
 The District Court set aside the Secretary’s decision to 
reinstate a citizenship question on the grounds that the 
Secretary acted arbitrarily and violated certain provisions 
of the Census Act.  The Government contests those ru l-
ings, but also argues that the Secretary’s decision was not 
judicially reviewable under the Administrative Procedure 
Act in the first place.  We begin with that contention. 
A 
 The Administrative Procedure Act embodies a “basic 
presumption of judicial review,” Abbott Laboratories v. 
Gardner, 387 U.  S. 136, 140 (1967), and instructs revie w-
ing courts to set aside agency action that is “arbi trary, 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in 
accordance with law,” 5 U.  S. C. §706(2)(A).  Review is not 
available, however, “to the extent that” a relevant statute 
precludes it, §701(a)(1), or the agency action is “committed 
to agency discretion by law,” §701(a)(2).  The G overnment 
14 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
argues that the Census Act commits to the Secretary’s 
unreviewable discretion decisions about what questions to 
include on the decennial census questionnaire. 
 We disagree.  To be sure, the Act confers broad authority 
on the Secretary.  Section 141(a) instructs him to take “a 
decennial census of population” in “such form and content 
as he may determine, including the use of sampling proc e-
dures and special surveys.”  13 U.  S. C. §141.  The Act 
defines “census of population” to mean “a census of pop u-
lation, housing, and matters relating to population and 
housing,” §141(g), and it authorizes the Secretary, in 
“connection with any such census,” to “obtain such other 
census information as necessary,” §141(a).  It also  states 
that the “Secretary shall prepare questionnaires, and shall 
determine the inquiries, and the number, form, and subdi-
visions thereof, for the statistics, surveys, and censuses 
provided for in this title.”  §5.  And it authorizes him to 
acquire materials, such as administrative records, from 
other federal, state, and local agencies in aid of conducting 
the census.  §6.  Those provisions leave much to the  
Secretary’s discretion.  See Wisconsin, 517 U.  S., at 19 
(“Through the Census Act, Congress has delegated its 
broad authority over the census to the Secretary.”). 
 But they do not leave his discretion unbounded.  I n 
order to give effect to the command that courts set aside 
agency action that is an abuse of disc retion, and to honor 
the presumption of judicial review, we have read the 
§701(a)(2) exception for action committed to agency discre-
tion “quite narrowly, restricting it to ‘those rare circu m-
stances where the relevant statute is drawn so that a 
court would have no meaningful standard against which to 
judge the agency’s exercise of discretion. ’ ”  Weyerhaeuser 
Co. v. United States Fish and Wildlife Serv., 586 U. S. ___, 
___ (2018) (slip op., at 12) (quoting Lincoln  v. Vigil, 508 
U. S. 182, 191 (1993)).  And w e have generally limited the 
exception to “certain categories of administrative decisions 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 15 
 
Opinion of the Court 
that courts traditionally have regarded as ‘committed to 
agency discretion,’ ” id., at 191, such as a decision not to 
institute enforcement proceedings, Heckler v. Chaney, 470 
U. S. 821, 831–832 (1985), or a decision by an intelligence 
agency to terminate an employee in the interest of national 
security, Webster v. Doe, 486 U. S. 592, 600–601 (1988). 
 The taking of the census is not one of those areas  tradi-
tionally com mitted to agency discretion.   We and other 
courts have entertained both constitutional and statutory 
challenges to census -related decisionmaking.  See, e.g., 
Department of Commerce, 525 U.  S. 316; Wisconsin, 517 
U. S. 1; Carey v. Klutznick, 637 F. 2d 834 (CA2 1980). 
 Nor is the statute here drawn so that it furnishes no 
meaningful standard by which to judge the Secretary’s 
action.  In contrast to the National Security Act  in Web-
ster, which gave the Director of Central Intelligence di s-
cretion to terminate employees whenever he “deem[ed]” it 
“advisable,” 486 U.  S., at 594, the Census Act constrains 
the Secretary’s authority to determine the  form and co n-
tent of the census  in a number of ways.   Section 195, for 
example, governs the extent to which he can use statistical 
sampling.  Section 6(c), which will be considered in more 
detail below, circumscribes his power in certain circu m-
stances to collect information through direct inquiries 
when administrative records are available.  More generally, 
by mandating a population count that will be used to 
apportion representatives, see §141(b), 2 U.  S. C. §2a, the 
Act imposes “a duty to conduct a census that is accurate 
and that fairly accounts for the crucial representational 
rights that depend on the cens us and the apportionment.”  
Franklin, 505 U. S., at 819–820 (Stevens, J., concurring in 
part and concurring in judgment). 
 The Secretary’s decision to reinstate a citizenship que s-
tion is amenable to review for compliance with those and 
other provisions of the Census Act, according to the gen-
eral requirements of reasoned agency decisionmaking.  
16 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
Because this is not a case in which there is “no law to 
apply,” Overton Park , 401 U.  S., at 410,  the Secretary’s 
decision is subject to judicial review. 
B 
 At the heart of this suit is respondents’ claim that the 
Secretary abused his discretion in deciding to reinstate a 
citizenship question.  We review the Secretary’s exercise of 
discretion under the deferential “arbitrary and capricious” 
standard.  See 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A).  Our scope of review 
is “narrow”: we determine only whether the Secretary 
examined “the relevant data” and articulated “a satisfa c-
tory explanation” for his decision, “including a rational 
connection between the facts found and the ch oice made.”  
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United States , Inc. v. State 
Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. , 463 U.  S. 29, 43 (1983) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  We may not subst i-
tute our judgment for that of the Secretary, ibid. , but 
instead must confine ourselves to ensuring that he r e-
mained “within the bounds of reasoned decisionmaking,” 
Baltimore Gas & Elec. Co.  v. Natural Resources Defense 
Council, Inc., 462 U. S. 87, 105 (1983). 
 The District Court set aside the Secretary’s decision for 
two independent reasons: His course of action was not 
supported by the evidence before him, and his stated 
rationale was pretextual.  We focus on the first point here 
and take up the question of pretext later. 
 The Secretary examined the Bureau’s analysis of var i-
ous wa ys to collect improved citizenship data and e x-
plained why he thought the best course was to both rein-
state a citizenship question and use citizenship data from 
administrative records to fill in the gaps.  He considered 
but rejected the Bureau’s recommendation to use admini s-
trative records alone.  As he explained, records are lacking 
for about 10% of the population, so the Bureau would still 
need to estimate cit izenship for millions of voting -age 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 17 
 
Opinion of the Court 
people.  Asking a citizenship question of everyone, the 
Secretary reasoned, would eliminate the need to estimate 
citizenship for many of those people.  And supplementing 
census responses with administrative record data would 
help complete the picture and allow the Bureau to better 
estimate citizenship for the smaller  set of cases where it 
was still necessary to do so. 
 The evidence before the Secretary supported that dec i-
sion.  As the Bureau acknowledged, each approach —using 
administrative records alone, or asking about citizenship 
and using records to fill in the gap s—entailed tradeoffs 
between accuracy and completeness.  Without a citize n-
ship question, the Bureau would need to estimate the 
citizenship of about 35 million people; with a citizenship 
question, it would need to estimate the citizenship of only 
13.8 million.  Under either approach, there would be some 
errors in both the administrative records and the Bureau’s 
estimates.  With a citizenship question, there would also 
be some erroneous self -responses (about 500,000) and 
some conflicts between responses and a dministrative 
record data (about 9.5 million). 
 The Bureau explained that the “relative quality” of the 
citizenship data generated by each approach would depend 
on the “relative importance of the errors” in each, but it 
was not able to “quantify the relati ve magnitude of the 
errors ac ross the alternatives.”  A pp. 148.  The Bureau 
nonetheless recommended using administrative records 
alone because it had “high confidence” that it could develop 
an accurate model for estimating the citizenship of the 35 
million people for whom administrative records were not 
available, and it thought the resulting citizenship data 
would be of superior quality.  Id. , at  146, 158–159.  But 
when the time came for the Secretary to make a decision, 
the model did not yet exist, and ev en if it had, there was 
no way to gauge its relative accuracy .  As the Bureau put 
it, “we will most likely never possess a fully adequate 
18 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
truth deck to benchmark” the model —which appears to be 
bureaucratese for “maybe, maybe not.”  Id. , at 146.  The 
Secretary opted instead for the approach that would yield 
a more complete set of data at an acceptable rate of accu-
racy, and would require estimating the citizenship of 
fewer people. 
 The District Court overruled that choice, agreeing with 
the Bureau’s ass essment that its recommended approach 
would yield higher quality citizenship data on the whole.  
But the choice between reasonable policy alternatives in 
the face of uncertainty was the Secretary’s to make.   He 
considered the relevant factors, weighed risk s and bene-
fits, and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his 
decision.  In overriding that reasonable exercise of discr e-
tion, the court improperly substituted its ju dgment for 
that of the agency. 
 The Secretary then weighed the benefit of collecting 
more complete and accurate citizenship data against the 
risk that inquiring about citizenship would depress census 
response rates, particularly among noncitizen households.  
In the Secretary’s view, that risk was difficult to assess.  
The Bureau predicted a 5.1% decline in response rates 
among noncitizen households if the citizenship question 
were reinstated.2  It relied for that prediction primarily on 
studies showing that , while noncitizens had responded at 
lower rates than citizens to the  2000 short-form and 2010 
censuses, which did not ask about citizenship, they r e-
sponded at even lower rates than citizens to the 2000 long-
form census and the 2010 American Community Survey, 
which did ask about citizenship.  The Bureau thought it 
was reasonable to infer t hat the citizenship question 
accounted for the differential decline in noncitizen r e-
—————— 
2 Several months after the Secretary made his decision, the Bureau 
updated its prediction to 5.8%, the figure the District Court later relied 
on in its standing analysis.  See 351 F. Supp. 3d 502, 579 (SDNY 2019). 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 19 
 
Opinion of the Court 
sponses.  But, the Secretary explained, the Bureau was 
unable to rule out other causes.  For one thing, the ev i-
dence before the Secretary suggested that noncitizen 
households tend to be more distrustful of, and less likely 
to respond to, any government effort to collect info r-
mation.  For another, both the 2000 long -form census and 
2010 ACS asked over 45 questions on a range of topics, 
including employment, income, and housin g characteri s-
tics.  Noncitizen households might disproportionately fail 
to respond to a lengthy and intrusive Government que s-
tionnaire for a number of reasons besides reluctance t o 
answer a citizenship question —reasons relating to educ a-
tion level, socioeco nomic status, and less exposure to 
Government outreach efforts.  See App.  to Pet. for Cert.  
553a–554a, 557a–558a. 
 The Secretary justifiably found the Bureau’s analysis  
inconclusive.  Weighing that uncertainty against the value 
of obtaining more complete a nd accurate citizenship data, 
he determined that reinstating a citizenship question was 
worth the risk of a potentially lower response rate.  That 
decision was reasonable and reasonably explained, parti c-
ularly in light of the long history of the citizenshi p ques-
tion on the census. 
 JUSTICE BREYER would conclude otherwise, but only by 
subordinating the Secretary’s policymaking discretion to 
the Bureau’s technocratic expertise.  J USTICE BREYER’s 
analysis treats the Bureau’s (pessimistic) prediction about 
response rates and (optimistic) assumptions about its data 
modeling abilities as touchstones of substantive reason - 
ableness rather than simply evidence for the Secretary to 
consider.  He suggests that the Secretary should have 
deferred to the Bureau or at lea st offered some special 
justification for drawing his own inferences and adopting 
his own assumptions.  But the Census Act authorizes the 
Secretary, not the Bureau, to make policy choices within 
the range of reasonable options.  And the evidence before 
20 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
the Secretary hardly led ineluctably to just one reasonable 
course of action.  It called for value -laden decisionmaking 
and the weighing of incommensurables under conditions of 
uncertainty.  The Secretary was required to consider the 
evidence and give reasons  for his chosen course of action.  
He did so.  It is not for us to ask whether his decision was 
“the best one possible” or even whether it was “better than 
the alternatives.”  FERC v. Electric Power Supply Assn. , 
577 U.  S. ___ , ___ (2016) (slip op., at 30).  By second -
guessing the Secretary’s weighing of risks and benefits 
and penalizing him for departing from the Bureau’s infe r-
ences and assumptions, JUSTICE BREYER—like the District 
Court—substitutes his judgment for that of the agency. 
C 
 The District Court also ruled that the Secretary violated 
two particular provisions of the Census Act, §6(c) and 
§141(f ). 
 Section 6 has three subsections.  Subsections (a) and (b) 
authorize the Secretary to acquire administrative records 
from other federa l agencies and from state and local gov-
ernments.3  Subsection (c) states: 
 “To the maximum extent possible and consistent 
with the kind, timeliness, quality and scope of the sta-
tistics required, the Secretary shall acquire and use 
information available fro m any source referred to in 
—————— 
3 The full text of subsections (a) and (b) provides: 
 “(a) The Secretary, whenever he considers it advisable, may call upon 
any other department, agency, or establishment of the Federal  
Government, or of the government of the District of Columbia, for 
information pertinent to the work provided for in this title. 
 “(b) The Secretary may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, from 
States, counties, cities, or other units of government, or their instr u-
mentalities, or from private persons and agencies, such copies of 
records, reports, and other material as may be required for the efficient 
and economical conduct of the censuses and surveys provided for in this 
title.” 13 U. S. C. §6. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 21 
 
Opinion of the Court 
subsection (a) or (b) of this section instead of conduc t-
ing direct inquiries.”  13 U. S. C. §6(c). 
 The District Court held, and respondents argue, that the 
Secretary failed to comply with §6(c) because he opted to 
collect citizenship data using direct inquiries when it was 
possible to provide DOJ with data from  administrative 
records alone. 
 At the outset, §6(c) may not even apply here.  It governs 
the Secretary’s choices with respect to “statistics re-
quired.”  The parties have assumed that phrase refers to 
census-related data that the Secretary wishes to acquire, 
but it may instead refer to particular kinds of statistics 
that other provisions of the Census Act actually do require 
the Secretary to collect and publish.  See, e.g. , §41 (“The 
Secretary shall collect and publish statistics concerning 
[cotton and cotton production].”); §61 (“The Secretary shall 
collect, collate, and publish monthly statistics concerning 
[vegetable and animal oils and the like].”); §91 (“The Se c-
retary shall collect and publish quarterly financial stati s-
tics of business operations, organization, practices, ma n-
agement, and relation to other businesses.”).  If so, §6(c) 
would seem to have nothing to say about the Secretary’s 
collection of census-related citizenship data, which is not a 
“statistic” he is “required” to collect. 
 Regardless, assuming the provision applies, the Secr e-
tary complied with it, for essentially the same reasons  
that his decision was not arbitrary and capricious.  As he 
explained, administrative records would not, in his jud g-
ment, provide the more complete and accurate data that 
DOJ sought.  He thus could not, “consistent with” the kind 
and quality of the “statistics required,” use administrative 
records instead of asking about citizensh ip directly.  R e-
spondents’ arguments to the contrary rehash their dis - 
agreement with the Secretary’s policy judgment about 
which approach would yield the most complete and acc u-
22 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
rate citizenship data.  For the reasons already discussed, 
we may not substitut e our judgment for that of the Secr e-
tary here. 
 We turn now to §141(f ), which requires the Secretary to 
report to Congress about his plans for the census.  Par a-
graph (1) instructs him to submit, at least three years 
before the census date, a report containing his “determina-
tion of the subjects proposed to be included, and the types 
of information to be compiled,” in the census.  Paragraph 
(2) then tells him to submit, at least two years before the 
census date, a report containing his “determination of the 
questions proposed to be included” in the census.  Par a-
graph (3) provides: 
 “[A]fter submission of a report under paragraph (1)  
or (2) of this subsection and before the appropriate 
census date, if the Secretary finds new circumstances 
exist which necessitate that the subjects, types of i n-
formation, or questions contained in reports so su b-
mitted be modified, [he shall submit] a report contai n-
ing the Secretary’s determination of the subjects, 
types of informati on, or questions as proposed to be 
modified.” 
 The Secretary timely submitted his paragraph (1) report 
in March 2017.  It did not mention citizenship.  In Dece m-
ber 2017, he received DOJ’s formal request.  Three months 
later, in March 2018, he timely submitted his para- 
graph (2) report.  I t did propose asking a question about 
citizenship. 
 The District Court held that the Secretary’s failure to 
mention citizenship in his March 2017 report violated 
§141(f )(1) and provided an independent basis to set aside 
his action.  Assumin g without deciding that the Secre-
tary’s compliance with the report ing requirement is for 
courts—rather than Congress—to police, we disagree.  The 
Secretary’s March 2018 report satisfied the requirements 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 23 
 
Opinion of the Court 
of paragraph (3): By informing Congress that he propo sed 
to include a citizenship question, the Secretary necessarily 
also informed Congress that he proposed to modify the 
original list of subjects that he submitted in the March 
2017 report.  Nothing in §141(f ) suggests that the same 
report cannot simultaneously fulfill the requirements of 
paragraphs (2) and (3 ).  And to the extent paragraph  (3) 
requires the Secretary to explain his finding of new ci r-
cumstances, he did so in his March 2018 memo, which 
described DOJ’s intervening request. 
 In any event, even if we agreed with the District Court 
that the Secretary technically violated §141(f ) by submi t-
ting a paragraph  (2) report that doubled as a paragraph  
(3) report, the error would surely be harmless in these 
circumstances, wher e the Secretary nonetheless fully 
informed Congress of, and explained, his decision.  See 5 
U. S. C. §706 (in reviewing agency action, “due account 
shall be taken of the rule of prejudicial error”). 
V 
 We now consider the District Court’s determination that 
the Secretary’s decision must be set aside because it rested 
on a pretextual basis , which the Government conceded 
below would warrant a remand to the agency. 
 We start with settled propositions .  First, in order to 
permit meaningful judicial review, an  agency must “di s-
close the basis” of its  action.  Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. 
v. United States, 371 U.  S. 156, 167– 169 (1962) (internal 
quotation marks omitted); see also SEC v. Chenery Corp., 
318 U. S. 80, 94 (1943)  (“[T]he orderly functioning of the 
process of review requires that the grounds upon which 
the administrative agency acted be clearly disclose d and 
adequately sustained.”). 
 Second, in reviewing agency action, a court is ordinarily 
limited to evaluating the agency’s contemporaneous ex-
planation in light of the existing administrative record.  
24 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp.  v. Natural R e-
sources Defense Council , Inc., 435 U.  S. 519, 549 (1978); 
Camp v. Pitts, 411 U. S. 138, 142–143 (1973) (per curiam).  
That principle reflects the recognition that further judicial 
inquiry into “executive motivation” represents “a substa n-
tial intrusion” into the workings of another branch of 
Government and should normally be avoided.  Arlington 
Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development Corp. , 429 
U. S. 252, 268, n. 18 (1977); see Overton Park, 401 U. S., at 
420. 
 Third, a court may not reject an agency’s stated reasons 
for acting simply becaus e the agency might also have had 
other unstated reasons.  See Jagers v. Federal Crop Ins. 
Corp., 758 F.  3d 1179, 1185– 1186 (CA10 2014) (rejecting 
argument that “the agency’s subjective desire to reach a 
particular result must necessarily invalidate the res ult, 
regardless of the objective evidence supporting the  
agency’s conclusion”).  Relatedly, a court may not set aside 
an agency’s policymaking decision solely because it might 
have been influenced by political considerations or 
prompted by an Administration’s priorities.  Agency policy-
making is not a “rarified technocratic process, unaffected  
by political considerations or the presence of Presidential 
power.”  Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.  2d 298, 408 (CADC 
1981).  Such decisions are routinely informed by u nstated 
considerations of politics, the legislative process, public 
relations, interest group relations, foreign relations, and 
national security concerns (among others). 
 Finally, we have recognized a narrow exception to the 
general rule against inquiring  into “the mental processes 
of administrative decisionmakers.”  Overton Park , 401 
U. S., at 420.  On a “strong showing of bad faith or i m-
proper behavior,” such an inquiry may be warranted  and 
may justify extra -record discovery .  Ibid. 
 The District Court invoked that exception in ordering 
extra-record discovery here.  Although that order was 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 25 
 
Opinion of the Court 
premature, we think it was ultimately justified in light of 
the expanded administrative record.  Recall that shortly 
after this litigation began, the Secretary, prodded by DOJ, 
filed a supplemental memo that added new, pertinent 
information to the administrative record.  The memo 
disclosed that the Secretary had been considering the 
citizenship question for some time and that Commerce had 
inquired whether  DOJ would formally request reinstat e-
ment of the question.  That supplemental memo prompted 
respondents to move for both completion of the adminis-
trative record and extra -record discovery.  The District 
Court granted both requests at the same hearing, agreeing 
with respondents that the Government had submitted an 
incomplete administrative record and that the existing  
evidence supported a prima facie showing that the VRA 
rationale was pretextual. 
 The Government did not challenge the court’s conclusion 
that the administrative record was incomplete, and the 
parties stipulated to the inclusion of more than 12,000  
pages of internal deliberative materials as part of the 
administrative record, materials that the court later held 
were sufficient on their own to dem onstrate pretext.  The 
Government did, however, challenge the District Court’s 
order authorizing extra -record discovery, as well as the 
court’s later orders compelling depositions of the Secretary 
and of the Acting Assistant Attorney General fo r DOJ’s 
Civil Rights Division. 
 We agree with the Government that the District Court 
should not have ordered extra -record discovery when it 
did.  At that time, the most that was warranted was the 
order to complete the administrative record.  But the new 
material that the parties stipulated should have been part 
of the administrative record —which showed, among other 
things, that the VRA played an insignificant role in the 
decisionmaking process —largely justified  such extra -
record discovery as occurred (which did not include the 
26 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
deposition of the Secretary himself) .  We accordingly 
review the District Court’s ruling on pretext in light of all 
the evidence in the record  before the court , including the 
extra-record discovery. 
 That evidence showed that the Secretary was deter-
mined to reinstate a citizenship question from the time he 
entered office; instructed his staff to make it happen; 
waited while Commerce officials explored whether another 
agency would request census -based citizenship data; 
subsequently contacted the Attorney General himself  to 
ask if DOJ would make the request ; and adopted the 
Voting Rights Act rationale late in the process.  In the 
District Court’s view, this evidence established that the 
Secretary had made up his mind to reinstate a citizenship 
question “well before” receiving DOJ’s request, and did so 
for reasons unknown but unrelated to the VRA.  351 F. 
Supp. 3d, at 660. 
 The Government, on the other hand, contends that there 
was nothing objectionable or even surprising in this .  And 
we agree—to a point.  It is hardly improper for an agency 
head to come into office with policy preferences and ideas, 
discuss them with affected parties, sound out other age n-
cies for support, and work with staff attorneys to substa n-
tiate the legal basis for a preferred policy.  The record here 
reflects the sometimes involved nature of E xecutive 
Branch decisionmaking, but no particular step in the 
process stands out as inappropriate or defective. 
 And yet, viewing the evidence as a wh ole, we share the 
District Court’s conviction that the decision to reinstate a 
citizenship question cannot be adequately explained in 
terms of DOJ’s request for improved citizenship data to 
better enforce the VRA.  Several points, considered to-
gether, reveal a significant mismatch between the decision 
the Secretary made and the rationale he provided. 
 The record shows that the Secretary began taking steps 
to reinstate a citizenship question about a week into his 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 27 
 
Opinion of the Court 
tenure, but it contains no hint that he was c onsidering 
VRA enforcement in connection with that project .  The 
Secretary’s Director of Policy did not know why the Secre-
tary wished to reinstate the question, but saw it as his 
task to “find the best rationale.”  Id.,  at 551.  The Director 
initially attempted to elicit re quests for citizenship data 
from the Department of Homeland Security and DOJ’s 
Executive Office for Immigration Review, neither of which 
is responsible for enforcing the VRA.  After those attempts 
failed, he asked Commerce staff to look into whether the 
Secretary could reinstate the question without receiving a 
request from another agency.  The possibility that DOJ ’s 
Civil Rights Division  might be willing to request citizen-
ship data for VRA enforcement purposes was proposed by 
Commerce staff along the way and eventually pursued. 
 Even so, it was not until the Secretary contacted the 
Attorney General directly that DOJ’s Civil Rights Division 
expressed interest in acquiring census -based citizenship 
data to better enforce the VRA.  And even th en, the record 
suggests that DOJ’s interest was directed more to helping 
the Commerce Department than to securing the data.  The 
December 2017 letter from DOJ drew heavily on contribu-
tions from Commerce staff and advisors .  Their influence 
may explain why the letter went beyond a simple entreaty 
for better citizenship data —what one might expect of a 
typical request from another agency —to a specific request 
that Commerce collect the data by means of reinstating a 
citizenship question on the census.  Finally, after sending 
the letter, DOJ declined the Census  Bureau’s offer to 
discuss alternative ways to meet DOJ’s stated need for 
improved citizenship data , further suggesting a lack of 
interest on DOJ’s part. 
 Altogether, the evidence tells a story that does not 
match the explanation the Secretary gave for his decision.  
In the Secretary’s telling, Commerce was simply acting on 
a routine data request from another agency.  Yet the 
28 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of the Court 
materials before us indicate that Commerce went to great 
lengths to elicit the request from DOJ (or any other willing 
agency).  And unlike a typical case in which an agency 
may have both stated and unstated reasons for a decision, 
here the VRA enforcement  rationale—the sole stated re a-
son—seems to have been contrived. 
 We are presented, in other words,  with an explanation 
for agency action that is incongruent with what the record 
reveals about the agency’s priorities and decisionmaking 
process.  It is rare to review a record as extensive as the 
one before us when evaluating informal agency action—
and it should be.  But having done so for the sufficient 
reasons we have explained, we cannot ignore the discon-
nect between the decision made and the explanation given.  
Our review is deferential, but we are “not required to 
exhibit a naiveté from which ordinary citizens are free.”  
United States  v. Stanchich, 550 F.  2d 1294, 1300 (CA2 
1977) (Friendly, J.).  The reasoned explanation requir e-
ment of administrative law, after all, is meant to ensure 
that agencies offe r genuine justifications for important 
decisions, reasons that can be scrutinized by courts and 
the interested public.  Accepting contrived reasons would 
defeat the purpose of the enterprise.  If judicial review is to 
be more than an empty ritual , it must demand something 
better than the explanation offered for the action taken in 
this case. 
 In these unusual circumstances, the District Court was  
warranted in remanding to the agency, and we affirm that 
disposition.  See Florida Power & Light Co.  v. Lorion, 470 
U. S. 729 , 744  (1985).  We do not hold that the agency 
decision here was substantively invalid.  But agencies 
must pursue their goals reasonably.  Reasoned dec i-
sionmaking under the Administrative Procedure Act calls 
for an explanation for agency action .  What was provided 
here was more of a distraction. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 29 
 
Opinion of the Court 
*  *  * 
 The judgment of the United States District Court for the 
Southern District of New York is affirmed in part and 
reversed in part, and the case is remanded for further  
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
 
It is so ordered. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 1 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 18–966 
_________________ 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. NEW YORK, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI BEFORE JUDGMENT TO THE UNITED 
STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
[June 27, 2019] 
 JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom J USTICE GORSUCH and 
JUSTICE KAVANAUGH join, concurring in part and dissen t-
ing in part. 
 In March 2018, the Secretary of Commerce exercised his 
broad discretion over the administration of the decennial 
census to resume  a nearly unbroken practice of asking a 
question relating to citizenship.  Our only role in this case 
is to decide whether the Secretary complied with the law 
and gave a reasoned explanation for his  decision.  The 
Court correctly answers these questions in the affirmative.  
Ante, at 11–23.  That ought to end our inquiry. 
 The Court, however, goes further.  For the first time 
ever, the Court invalidates an agency action solely because 
it questions the  sincerity of the agency’s otherwise ad e-
quate rationale.  Echoing the din of suspicion and distrust 
that seems to typify modern discourse, the Court declares 
the Secretary’s memorandum “pretextual” because, “vie w-
ing the evidence as a whole,” his explanation that includ-
ing a citizenship question on the census would help en-
force the Voting Rights Act (VRA) “seems to have been 
contrived.”  Ante, at 23, 26, 28.   The Court does not hold 
that the Secretary merely had additional , unstated  rea-
sons for reinstating t he citizenship question.  Rather, it 
holds that the Secretary’s stated rationale did not factor at 
all into his decision. 
2 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
 The Court’s holding reflects an unprecedented departure 
from our deferential review of discretionary agency dec i-
sions.  And, i f taken  seriously as a rule of decision , this 
holding would transform administrative law.  It is not 
difficult for political opponents of executive actions to 
generate controversy with accusations of pretext, deceit, 
and illicit motives.  Significant policy decis ions are reg u-
larly criticized as products of partisan influence, interest-
group pressure, corruption, and animus.  Crediting these 
accusations on evidence as thin as the evidence here could 
lead judicial review of administrative proceedings to d e-
volve into an endless morass of discovery and policy di s-
putes not contemplated by the Administrative Procedure 
Act (APA). 
 Unable to identify any legal problem with the Secr e-
tary’s reasoning, the Court imputes one by concluding that 
he must not be telling the truth.   The Court therefore up - 
holds the decision of the District Court—which, in turn, was 
transparently based on the application of an administration-
specific standard.  App. to Pet. for Cert. 527a (crediting 
respondents’ allegations that “the current  Depart- 
ment of Justice has shown little interest in enforcing the” 
VRA (emphasis added)). 
 The law requires a more impartial approach.  Even 
assuming we are authorized to engage in the review u n-
dertaken by the Court —which is far from clear —we have 
often stated that courts reviewing agency action owe the 
Executive a “presumption of regularity .”  Citizens to Pr e-
serve Overton Park, Inc.  v. Volpe, 401 U.  S. 402, 415 
(1971).  The Court pays only lipservice to this principle.  
But, the evidence falls far short of suppo rting its decision.  
The Court, I fear, will come to regret inventing the princ i-
ples it uses to achieve today’s result.  I respectfully dissent 
from Part V of the opinion of the Court.1 
—————— 
1 JUSTICE KAVANAUGH and I join Parts I, II, III, and IV of the opinion 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 3 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
I 
 As the Court explains, federal law directs the Secretary 
of Commerc e to “take a decennial census .”  13 U.  S. C. 
§141(a); see U.  S. Const., Art.  I, §2, cl. 3; Amdt. XIV, §2; 
ante, at 1–2.  The discretion afforded the Secretary is 
extremely broad.  Subject only to constitutional limitations 
and a handful of inapposite statu tory requirements, the 
Secretary is expressly authorized to “determine the inquir-
ies” on the census questionnaire and to conduct the census 
“in such form and content as he may determine.”  § §5, 
141(a); see ante, at 14–16, 20–23.2  Prior census question-
naires have included questions ranging from sex, age, and 
race to commute, education, and radio ownership.  And 
between 1820 and 2010, every decennial census questio n-
naire but one asked some segment of the population a 
question related to citizenship.  The 201 0 census was the 
first since 1840 that did not include any such question. 
 In March 2018, the Secretary issued a memorandum 
reinstating a citizenship question on the 2020 census.  He 
explained that the Department of Justice  (DOJ) had fo r-
mally requested reinstatement of the question because the 
data obtained would help  enforce §2 of the VRA.  He fu r-
ther explained that the question had been well tested in 
light of its extensive previous use, that he had consulted 
with the Census Bureau on the proposal, and that his final 
—————— 
of the Court.  JUSTICE GORSUCH joins Parts I, II, III, IV–B, and IV–C. 
2 JUSTICE ALITO has made a strong argument that the specific decision 
at issue here —whether to include a citizenship question on the ce n-
sus—is a matter “committed to agency discretion by law.”  5 U.  S. C. 
§701(a)(2); see post, at 3 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in 
part).  As he explai ns, the Secretary’s decision plainly falls within the 
scope of the Secretary’s constitutional authority, does not implicate any 
statutory prohibition, and is among the “inquiries” and “content [s]” of 
the census that the Secretary is expressly directed  to “determine” for 
himself.  §§5, 141(a); see post, at 5–15.  Nevertheless, I assume, for the 
purpose of this opinion, that the Secretary’s decision is subject to 
judicial review. 
4 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
decision incorporated feedback from the Bureau.  He 
recognized that staff at the Bureau believed that better 
data could be obtained through modeling and reliance on 
existing records, but he disagreed with that assessment, 
explaining that the  data was inconclusive and that he 
thought it preferable to ask the question directly of the 
entire population.  Respondents brought suit, seeking 
judicial review of the Secretary’s decision under the APA, 
5 U. S. C. §706. 
II 
 As relevant here, the APA req uires courts to “hold u n-
lawful and set aside” agency action that is “arbitrary, 
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in 
accordance with law.”  §706(2)(A).  We have emphasized 
that “[r]eview under the arbitrary and capricious standard 
is def erential.”  National Assn. of Home Builders v. De-
fenders of Wildlife , 551 U.  S. 644, 658 (2007) ; see Glick-
man v. Wileman Brothers & Elliott, Inc. , 521 U.  S. 457, 
466, n. 8 (1997).  It requires the reviewing court to dete r-
mine whether the agency “  ‘examine[d] the relevant data 
and articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for its action.’ ”  
FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc. , 556 U.  S. 502, 513 
(2009).  We have described this as a “  ‘narrow’ standard of 
review” under which the reviewing court cannot “  ‘substi-
tute its judgment for that of the agency,’ and should ‘u p-
hold a decision of less than ideal clarity if the agency’s 
path may reasonably be discerned. ’ ”  Id., at 513– 514 
(citation omitted); accord, Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of 
United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 
463 U. S. 29, 43 (1983).3 
—————— 
3 Deferential review of the agency’s discretionary choices and reaso n-
ing under t he arbitrary-and -capricious standard stands in marked 
contrast to a court’s plenary review of the agency’s interpretation and 
application of the law.  See §§706(A) –(D) (court must review agency 
action to ensure that it complies with all “constitutional,” “statutory,” 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 5 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
 Part IV–B of the opinion of the Court correctly applies 
this standard to conclude that the Secretary’s decision 
survives ordinary arbitrary -and-capricious review.  That 
holding should end our inquiry. 
 But the opinion continues.  Acknowledging that “no 
particular step” in the proceedings here “stands out as 
inappropriate or defective,” even after reviewing “all the 
evidence in the record  . . . , including the extra -record 
discovery,” ante, at 26, the Court nevertheless agrees with 
the District Court that the Secretary’s rationale for rei n-
stating the citizenship question was “pretextual —that is, 
that the real reason for his decision was something other 
than the sole reason he put forward in his m emorandum, 
namely enhancement of DOJ’s VRA enforcement efforts.”  
351 F.  Supp. 3d 502, 660 (SDNY 2019); see ante, at 28.  
According to the Court, something just “seems” wrong.  
Ibid. 
 This conclusion is extraordinary.  The Court engages in 
an unauthorized inquiry into evidence not properly before 
us to reach an unsupported conclusion.  Moreover, each 
step of the inquiry offends the presumption of regularity 
we owe the Executive.  The judgment of the District Court 
should be reversed. 
A 
 Section 706(2) of the APA contemplates review of the 
administrative “record” to determine whether an agency’s 
“action, findings, and conclusions” satisfy six specified 
standards.  See §§706(2)(A)–(F).  None instructs the Court 
to inquire into pretext.  Consistent with this st atutory 
text, we have held that a court is “ordinarily limited to 
evaluating the agency’s contemporaneous explanation in 
light of the existing administrative record.”  Ante, at 23 
—————— 
and “procedur[al]” requirements, and is otherwise “in accordance with 
law”). 
6 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
(citing Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp.  v. Natural 
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 435 U. S. 519, 549 (1978)); 
see SEC v. Chenery Corp., 318 U.  S. 80, 87  (1943) (“The 
grounds upon which an administrative order must be 
judged are those upon which the record discloses that its 
action was based”).  If an agency’s stated findings and 
conclusions withstand scrutiny, the APA does not permit a 
court to set aside the decision solely because t he agency 
had “ other unstated reasons” for its decision,  such as 
“political considerations ” or the “Administration’s prior i-
ties.”  Ante, at 24. 
 Unsurprisingly, then, this Court has never held an 
agency decision arbitrary and capricio us on the ground 
that its supporting rationale was “pretextual.”  Nor has it 
previously suggested that this was even a possibility.  
Under “settled propositions” of administrative law, ante, 
at 23, pretext is virtually never an appropriate or relevant 
inquiry for a reviewing court to undertake. 
 Respondents conceptualize pretext as a subset of “arb i-
trary and capricious” review.  It is far from clear that they 
are correct.  But even if they were, an agency action is not 
arbitrary or capricious merely because the decisionmaker 
has other, unstated re asons for the decision.  Ante , at 24.  
Nor is an agency action arbitrary and capricious merely 
because the decisionmaker was “inclined” to accomplish it 
before confirming that the law and facts supported that 
inclination.  In re Dept. of Commerce, 586 U.  S. ___, ___ 
(2018) (GORSUCH, J., concurring in part and dissenting in 
part) (slip op., at 2). 
 Accordingly, even under respondents’ approach, a sho w-
ing of pretext could render an agency action arbitrary and 
capricious only in the infinitesimally small number of 
cases in which the administrative record establishes that 
an agency’s stated rationale did not factor at all into the 
decision, thereby depriving the action of an adequate 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 7 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
supporting rationale.4  This showing is extremely difficult 
to make because the  administrative record will rarely, if 
ever, contain evidence sufficient to show that an agency’s 
stated rationale did not actually factor into its decision.  
And we have stated that a “strong showing of bad faith or 
improper behavior” is necessary to vent ure beyond the 
agency’s “administrative findings” and inquire into “the 
mental processes of administrative decisionmakers.”  
Overton Park , 401 U.  S., at  420.5  We have never before 
found Overton Park’s exception satisfied, much less invali-
dated an agency action based on “pretext.” 
 Undergirding our arbitrary -and-capricious analysis is 
our longstanding precedent affording the Executive a 
“presumption of regularity.”  Id., at 415; see United States 
v. Chemical Foundation, Inc. , 272 U.  S. 1, 14 –15 (1926) .  
This presumption reflects respect for a coordinate branch 
of government whose officers not only take an oath to 
—————— 
4 We do not have before us a claim that information outside the a d-
ministrative record calls into question the legality  of an agency action 
based on an unstated, unlawf ul bias or motivation ( e.g., a claim of 
religious discrimination under the Free Exercise Clause).  B ut to the 
extent such a claim is viable, the  analysis would have nothing to do 
with the arbitrary-and-capricious review pressed by respondents .  See 
§§706(2)(A)–(C) (addressing agency actions that violate “constitutional” 
or “statutory” requirements, or that “otherwise [are] n ot in accordance 
with law”). 
5 Insofar as Overton Park authorizes an exception to review on the 
administrative record, it has been crit icized as having “no textual 
grounding in the APA” and as “created by the Court, without citation or 
explanation, to facilitate Article III review.”  Gavoor & Platt, Admini s-
trative Records and the Courts, 67 U. Kan. L.  Rev. 1, 44 (2018); see id.,  
at 22 (further arguing that the exception was “neither presented by the 
facts of the case nor briefed by the parties”).  The legitimacy and scope 
of the exception—which by its terms contemplates only “administrative 
officials who participated in the decision .  . . giv[ing] testimony explain-
ing their action,” Overton Park , 401 U.  S., at 420—is an important 
question that may warrant future consideration.  But because the 
Court’s holding is incorrect regardless of the validity of the Overton 
Park exception, I will apply it here. 
8 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
support the Constitution, as we do, Art.  VI, but also are 
charged with “faithfully execut[ing]” our laws, Art.  II, §3.  
See United States  v. Morgan, 313 U.  S. 409, 422 (1941)  
(presumption of regularity ensures that the “integrity of 
the administrative process” is appropriately respected).  In 
practice, then, we give the benefit of the doubt to the 
agency. 
B 
 The Court errs at the outset by proceeding beyond the 
administrative record to evaluate pretext.  Respondents 
have not made a “strong showing of bad faith or improper 
behavior.”  Overton Park, supra, at 420. 
 The District Court’s initial order granting extra -record 
discovery relied on four categories of evidence: 
“evidence that [the Secretary] was predisposed to re-
instate the citizenship question when he took office; 
that the [DOJ] hadn’t expressed a desire for more de-
tailed citizenship data until the Secretary solicited its 
view; that he overruled the objections of his agency’s 
career staff; and that he declined to order more tes t-
ing of the question given its long history.”  Dept. of 
Commerce, 586 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2). 
None of this comes close to showing bad faith or improper 
behavior.  Indeed, there is nothing even “unusual about a 
new cabinet secretary coming to office inclined to favor a 
different policy direction, soliciting support from other 
agencies to bolster his views, disagreeing with staff, or 
cutting through red tape.”  Ibid.  Today all Members of the 
Court who reach the question agree that the District 
Court abused its discretion in ordering extra -record di s-
covery based on this evidence.  Ante, at 25 (“We agree with 
the Government that the District Court should not have 
ordered extra-record discovery when it did”). 
 Nevertheless, the Court excuses the error because, in its 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 9 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
view, “the new material that the parties [later] stipulated 
should have been part of the administrative record . . . 
largely justified such extra -record discovery as occurred.”  
Ibid.  Given the requirement that respondents make a 
“strong showing” of bad faith, one would expect the Court 
to identify which “new material” supported such a sho w-
ing.  It does not.  Nor does the Court square its suggestion 
that some of the extra -record discovery was not “justified” 
with its consideration of “all .  . . the extra -record disco v-
ery.”  Ante, at 25–26.  Regardless, I assume that the Court 
has in mind the administrative -record materials that the 
District Court would later rely on to establish pretext: 
“evidence that [the Secretary] had made the decision 
to add the citizenship question well before DOJ r e-
quested its addition in December 2017; the absence of 
any mention, at all, of VRA enforcement in the discus-
sions of adding the question that preceded the [DOJ] 
Letter; unsuccessful attempts by Commerce Depart-
ment staff to shop around for a request by another 
agency regarding citizenship data; and [the Secre-
tary’s] personal outr each to Attorney General Ses-
sions, followed by the [DOJ] Letter; not to mention the 
conspicuous procedural irregularities that accompa-
nied the decision to add the question. ”  351 F.  Supp. 
3d, at 661 (citations omitted). 
 This evidence fails to make a stron g showing of bad 
faith or improper behavior.  Taken together, it proves at 
most that the Secretary was predisposed to add a citize n-
ship question to the census and took steps to achieve that 
end before settling on the VRA rationale he included in his 
memorandum.  Perhaps he had reasons for adding the 
citizenship question other than the VRA, but by the 
Court’s own telling, that does not amount to evidence of 
bad faith or improper behavior.  Ante , at 24; see Dept. of 
Commerce, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 2). 
10 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
 The Court thus errs in relying on materials outside the 
record to support its holding.  And the Court does not 
claim that the evidence in the administrative record alone 
would prove that the March 2018 memorandum was a 
pretext.  Given the presumption of regularity, the evidence 
discussed above falls far short of establishing that the 
VRA rationale did not factor at all into the Secretary’s 
decision. 
C 
 Even if it were appropriate for the Court to rely on 
evidence outside the administrative record, that evid ence 
still fails to establish pretext.  None of the evidence cited 
by the Court or the District Court comes close to showing 
that the Secretary’s stated rationale —that adding a citi-
zenship question to the 2020 census questionnaire would 
“provide .  . . data  that are not currently available” and 
“permit more effective enforcement of the [VRA],” App. to 
Pet. for Cert. 548a—did not factor at all into his decision. 
 Once again, the evidence cited by the Court suggests at 
most that the Secretary had “other  unstated reasons” for 
reinstating the citizenship question.  Ante, at 24.  For 
example, the Court states that the Secretary’s Director of 
Policy “initially attempted to elicit requests for citizenship 
data from the Department of Homeland Security and 
DOJ’s Executive Office for Immigration Review.”  Ante , at 
27.  But this hardly shows pretext.  It simply suggests that 
the Director believed that citizenship information could be 
useful in tackling problems related to national security 
and illegal immigration —a view that would also explain 
why the Secretary might not have been “considering VRA 
enforcement” early on.  Ibid. ; see also American Comm u-
nity Survey, Why We Ask: Place of Birth, Citizenship and 
Year of Entry (2016) (explaining that inquiries about 
“place of bi rth, citizenship, and year of entry” provide 
statistics that are “essential for agencies and policy ma k-
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 11 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
ers setting and evaluating immigration policies and laws, 
understanding how different immigrant groups are assi m-
ilated, and monitoring against discrimina tion”), https://  
www2 . census . gov / programs - surveys / acs / about / qbyqfact / 
2016/Citizenship.pdf (as last visited June 25, 2019). 
 The Court emphasizes that the VRA rationale for the 
citizenship question originated in the Department of 
Commerce, and suggests that DOJ officials unthinkingly 
fell in line after the Attorney General was looped into the 
process.  See ante, at 27.  But the Court ignores that the 
letter was drafted by the then -Acting Assistant Attorney 
General for Civil Rights and reviewed by five other DOJ 
attorneys, including the Chief of the DOJ’s Voting Section.  
351 F. Supp. 3d, at 554 –556.  Given the DOJ’s multilayer 
review process and its explanation for requesting citizen-
ship data, the Court’s suggestion that the DOJ’s letter was 
inadequately vetted or improperly “influence[d]” by the 
Department of Commerce is entirely unsupported.  Ante , 
at 27.   In any event, none of this suggests, much less 
proves, that the Secretary harbored an unstated belief 
that adding the citizenship question would not help en-
force the VRA, or that the VRA rationale otherwise did not 
factor at all into his decision.  It simply suggests that a 
number of executive officials agreed that adding a citizen-
ship question would support VRA enforcement. 
 The Court’s other evidence is even further afield.  The 
Court thinks it telling that the DOJ’s letter included “a 
specific request that Commerce collect th e [citizenship] 
data by means of reinstating a citizenship question on the 
census,” rather than a more open -ended “entreaty for 
better citizenship data.”  Ibid.   I do not understand how 
the specificity of the DOJ’s letter bears on whether the 
Secretary’s rationale was  pretextual—particularly since 
the letter specifically explained why “census questionnaire 
data regarding citizenship, if available, would be more 
appropriate for use in redistricting and in [VRA] litig a-
12 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
tion” than existing data.  App. to Pet. f or Cert. 568a; see 
id., at 567a–568a.  Unless the Court is now suggesting 
that agency correspondence must comply with the Court’s 
subjective, unsupported view of what “might” constitute a 
“typical request from another agency,” ante, at 27, the 
specificity of the DOJ’s letter is irrelevant.  The Court also 
points to the DOJ’s decision not to meet with the Census 
Bureau “to discuss alternative ways to meet DOJ’s stated 
need for improved citizenship data.”  Ibid.   But the Court 
does not explain how the DOJ’s refusal bears on the Secre-
tary’s rationale.  Besides, it is easy to understand why 
DOJ officials would not  be interested in meeting  with the 
Census Bureau.  The meeting would have been with c a-
reer employees whose acknowledged purpose was to talk 
the DOJ out  of its request.  See 351 F.  Supp. 3d, at 557.  
Having already considered the issue and explained the 
rationale behind the request, it seems at least plausible 
that the DOJ officials believed such a meeting would be 
unproductive. 
 In short, the evidence cited by the Court establishes, at 
most, that leadership at both the Department of Co m-
merce and the DOJ believed it important —for a variety of 
reasons—to include a citizenship question on the census. 
 The Court also fails to give credit where it is due.  The  
Secretary initiated this process inclined to favor what he 
called “Option B” —that is, simply “add[ing] a citizenship 
question to the decennial census.”  App. to Pet. for Cert. 
552a.  But the Census Bureau favored “Option C”—relying 
solely on “administrative records” to supply the info r-
mation needed by the DOJ.  Id. , at 554a.  The Secretary 
considered this view and found it a “potentially appealing 
solution,” ibid., but concluded that it had shortcomings.  
Rather than revert to his original inclination, how ever, he 
“asked the Census Bureau to develop a fourth alternative, 
Option D, which would combine Options B and C.”  Id. , at 
555a.  And he settled on that solution.  Whatever one 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 13 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
thinks of the Secretary’s choice, his willingness to change 
his mind in light of the Bureau’s feedback belies the idea 
that his rationale or decisionmaking process was a  
pretext. 
 The District Court’s lengthy opinion pointed to other 
facts that, in its view, supported a finding of pretext.  351 
F. Supp. 3d, at 567 –572, 660– 664 (dis cussing the stat e-
ments, e -mails, acts, and omissions of numerous people 
involved in the process).  I do not deny that a judge pre-
disposed to distrust the Secretary or the administration 
could arrange those facts on a corkboard and —with a jar 
of pins and a spool of string —create an eye -catching con-
spiracy web .  Cf. id. , at 662 (inferring “from the various 
ways in which [the Secretary] and his aides acted like 
people with something to hide that they did have som e-
thing to hide”).  But the Court does not rely on this ev i-
dence, and rightly so: It casts no doubt on whether the 
Secretary’s stated rationale factored into his decision.  The 
evidence suggests, at most, that the Secretary had multi-
ple reasons for wanting to include the citizenship question 
on the census. 
 Finally, if there could be any doubt about this concl u-
sion, the presumption of regularity resolves it.  Where 
there are equally plausible views of the evidence, one of 
which involves attributing bad faith to an officer of a 
coordinate branch of Government, the presumption co m-
pels giving the benefit of the doubt to that officer. 
III 
 The Court’s erroneous decision in this case is bad 
enough, as it unjustifiably interferes with the 2020 census.  
But the implications of today’s decision are broader.  With 
today’s decision, the Court has opened a Pandora’s box of 
pretext-based challenges in administrative law. 
 Today’s decision marks the first time the Court has ever 
invalidated an agency action as “pretextual.”  Having 
14 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
taken that step, one thing is certain:  This will not be the 
last time it is asked to do so.  Virtually every significant 
agency action is vulnerable to the kinds of allegations the 
Court credits today.  These decisions regularly involve 
coordination with numerous stakeholders and agencies, 
involvement at the highest levels of the Executive Branch, 
opposition from reluctant agency staff, and—perhaps most 
importantly—persons who stand to gain from the action’s 
demise.  Opponents of future executive actions can be 
expected to make full use of the Court’s new approach. 
 The 2015 “Open Internet Order” provides a case in 
point.  In 2015, the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) adopted a controversial order reclassifying broa d-
band Internet access service as a “telecommunications 
service” subject to  regulation under Title II of the Com-
munications Act.  See In re Protecting and Promoting the 
Open Internet, 30 FCC Rcd. 5601, 5618 (2015).  According 
to a dissenting Commissioner, the FCC “flip-flopp[ed]” on 
its previous policy not because of a change in facts or legal 
understanding, but based on “one reason and one reason 
alone.  President Obama told us to do so.”  Id., at 5921 
(statement of Comm’r Pai) .  His view was supported by a 
2016 congressional R eport in which Republican Senate 
staff concluded that “the FCC bent to the political pres-
sure of the White House”  and “failed to live up to stan d-
ards of transparency.”   Majority Staff Report,  Senate 
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
Affairs, Regulating the Internet: How the White House 
Bowled O ver FCC Independence , 114th Cong., 1st Sess., 
29 (Comm. Print 2016).  The Report cited evidence stri k-
ingly similar to that relied upon by the Court here —
including agency-initiated “meetings with certain outside 
groups to support” the new result, id., at 3; “apparen[t] . . . 
concern from the career staff that there was insufficient 
notice to the public and affected stakeholders,” id.,  at 4; 
and “regula[r] communicatio[n]” between the FCC Chai r-
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 15 
 
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 
man and “presidential advisors,” id., at 25. 
 Under the malleable standard applied by the Court 
today, a serious case could be made that the Open Internet 
Order should have been invalidated as “pretextual,” r e-
gardless of whether any “particular step in the process 
stands out as inappropriate or defective.”  Ante, at 26.  It 
is enough, according to the Court, that a judge believes 
that the ultimate rationale “seems to have been contrived” 
when the evidence is considered “as a whole.”  A nte, at  
26, 28. 
 Now that the Court has opened up this avenue of attack, 
opponents of executive actions have strong incentives to 
craft narratives that would derail them.  Moreover, even if 
the effort to invalidate the action is ultimately unsucces s-
ful, the Court’s decision enables partisans to use the 
courts to harangue executive office rs through depositions, 
discovery, delay, and distraction.  The Court’s decision 
could even implicate separation-of-powers concerns insofar 
as it enables judicial interference with the enforcement of 
the laws. 
 In short, today’s decision is a departure fro m traditional 
principles of administrative law.  Hopefully it comes to be 
understood as an aberration—a ticket good for this day 
and this train only. 
*  *  * 
 Because the Secretary’s decision to reinstate a citizen-
ship question on the 2020 census was legal ly sound and a 
reasoned exercise of his broad discretion, I respectfully 
dissent from Part V of the opinion of the Court. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 1 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 18–966 
_________________ 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. NEW YORK, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI BEFORE JUDGMENT TO THE UNITED 
STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
[June 27, 2019] 
 JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG, 
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, and JUSTICE KAGAN join, concurring 
in part and dissenting in part. 
 I join Parts I, II, IV– A, and V of the Court’s opinion 
(except as otherwise indicated in this opinion).  I dissent, 
however, from the conclusion the Court reaches in Part 
IV–B.  To be more specific, I agree with the Court that the 
Secretary of Commerce provi ded a pretextual reason for 
placing a question about citizenship on the short -form 
census questionnaire and that a remand to the agency is 
appropriate on that ground.  But I write separately  be-
cause I also believe that the Secretary’s decision to add the 
citizenship question was arbitrary and capricious and 
therefore violated  the Administrative Procedure Act 
(APA). 
 There is no serious dispute that adding a citizenship 
question would diminish the accuracy of the enumeration 
of the population —the sole constitutional function of the 
census and a task of great practical importance.   The 
record demonstrates that the question would likely cause 
a disproportionate number of noncitizens and Hispanics to 
go uncounted in the upcoming census.  That, in turn, 
would cre ate a risk that some States would wrongfully 
lose a congressional representative and funding for a host 
of federal programs.   And, the Secretary was told, the 
2 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
adverse consequences would fall most heavily on minority 
communities.  The Secretary decided to a sk the question 
anyway, citing a need for more accurate citizenship data.  
But the evidence indicated that asking the question would 
produce citizenship data  that is less accurate, not more.  
And the reason t he Secretary gave  for needing better 
citizenship data in the first place —to help enforce the 
Voting Rights Act of 1965—was not convincing. 
 In short, the Secretary’s decision to add a citizenship 
question created a severe risk of harmful consequences, 
yet he did not adequately consider whether the quest ion 
was necessary or whether it was an appropriate means of 
achieving his stated goal.  The Secretary thus failed to 
“articulate a satisfactory explanation” for his decision, 
“failed to consider . . . important aspect[s] of the problem,” 
and “offered an ex planation for [his] decision that runs 
counter to the evidence,” all in violation of the APA.  Motor 
Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United States,  Inc. v. State Farm 
Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. , 463 U. S. 29, 43 (1983).   These 
failures, in my view, risked undermining public confidence 
in the  integrity of our democratic system itself.   I would 
therefore hold that the Secretary’s decision —whether 
pretextual or not—was arbitrary, capricious, and an abuse 
of discretion. 
I 
A 
 Three sets of laws determine the legal outcome of this 
case.  First, the Constitution requires an “actual Enume r-
ation” of the “whole number of persons in each State” 
every 10 years.  Art. I, §2, cl. 3; Amdt. 14, §2.  It does so in 
order to “provide a basis for apportioning representatives 
among the sta tes in the Congress.”  Baldrige v. Shapiro, 
455 U.  S. 345, 353 (1982); see also Art. I, §2, cl.  3.  The 
inclusion of this provision in the Constitution itself unde r-
scores the importance of conducting an accurate census.  
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 3 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
See Utah v. Evans, 536 U.  S. 452, 478 (2002)  (recognizing 
“a strong constitutional interest in  [the] accuracy” of the 
enumeration). 
 Second, the Census Act contains two directives that 
constrain the Secretary’s ability to add questions to the 
census.  Section 195 says that the Secretary “sh all, if he 
considers it feasible,” authorize the use of statistical “sam-
pling” in collecting demographic information.  That means 
the Secretary must, if feasible, obtain demographic infor-
mation through a survey sent to a sample of households, 
rather than t hrough the short -form census questionnaire 
to which every  household must respond.  The other rel e-
vant provision, §6(c),  says that “[ t]o the maximum extent 
possible and consistent with the kind, timeliness, quality 
and scope of the statistics required, the Secretary shall 
acquire and use information available” from administr a-
tive sources “instead of conducting direct inquiries.”  
(Emphasis added.)  These provisions, taken together, 
reflect a congressional preference for keeping the short 
form short, so that it does not burden recipients and 
thereby discourage them from responding. 
 Third, the APA prohibits administrative agencies from 
making choices that are “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of 
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.”  5 
U. S. C. §706(2)(A).  We have said that courts, in applying 
this provision, must decide “whether the decision was 
based on a consideration of the relevant factors and 
whether there has been a clear error of judgment.”  Cit i-
zens to Preserve Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U. S. 402, 
416 (1971).  The agency must have “examine[d] the rel e-
vant data and articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for 
its action[,] including a ‘rational connection between the 
facts found and the choice made.’  ”  State Farm , 463 U. S., 
at 43.  An agency ordinarily fails to meet this standard if 
it has “failed to consider an important aspect of the pro b-
lem, offered an explanation for its decision that runs 
4 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
counter to the evidence before the agency, or is so impla u-
sible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or 
the product of agency expertise.”  Ibid. 
 Courts do not apply these principles of administrative 
law mechanically.  Rather, they take into account, for 
example, the nature and importance of the particular 
decision, the relevance and importance of missing info r-
mation, and the inadequacies of a particular explanation 
in light of their importance.  The Federal Government 
makes tens of thousands, perhaps millions, of administr a-
tive decisions each year.  And courts would be wrong  to 
expect or insist upon administrative perfection.  But here, 
the Enumeration Clause, the Census Act, and the nature 
of the risks created by the agency’s decision all make clear 
that the decision before us is highly important to the 
proper functioning of  our democratic system.  It is ther e-
fore particularly important that courts here not overlook 
an agency’s (1) failure to consider serious risks of harm, 
(2) failure to explain its refusal to minimize those risks, or 
(3) failure to link its conclusion to av ailable evidence.  My 
view, like that of the District Court, is that the agency 
here failed on all three counts. 
B 
 A brief history of how the census has worked over the 
years will help the reader understand some of the shor t-
comings of the Secretary’s deci sionmaking process. The 
Framers wrote into the Constitution a mandate to conduct 
an “actual Enumeration” of the population every 10 years.  
Art. I, §2, cl.  3.  They did so for good reason.  The purpose 
of the census is to “provide a basis for apportioning repre-
sentatives among the states in the Congress,” Baldri ge, 
455 U. S., at 353, ensuring that “comparative state politi-
cal power in the House .  . . reflect[s] comparative popul a-
tion,” Evans, 536 U.  S., at 477.  The Framers required an 
actual count of every resident to “limit political chicanery” 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 5 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
and to prevent the census count from being “skewed for 
political . . . purposes.”  Id., at 500 (THOMAS, J., concurring 
in part and dissenting in part). 
 Throughout most o f the Nation’s history, the Federal 
Government used enumerators, often trained census 
takers, to conduct the census by going door to door.  The 
enumerators would ask a host of questions, including 
place of birth, citizenship, and others.  But after the 195 0 
census, the Bureau began to change its approach.  Post -
census studies revealed that the census had failed to count 
more than 5 million people and  that the undercount di s-
proportionately affected members of minority groups.  See 
M. Anderson, The American C ensus: A Social History 
201−202 (1988); Brief for Historians and Social Scientists 
as Amici Curiae  15.  Studies showed that statistical  
sampling would produce higher quality data.  Anderson, 
American Census, at 201. 
 Beginning with the 1960 census, the Bur eau cons e-
quently divided its questioning into a short form and a 
long form.  The short form contained a list of questions —a 
short list—that the census would ask of every household.  
That list included basic demographic questions like sex, 
age, race, and ma rital status.  The short form did not 
include, and has never included, a question about citize n-
ship.  See ibid.; Dept. of Commerce, U.  S. Census Bureau, 
Measuring America: The Decennial Censuses From 1790 
to 2000, p. 128 (2002).  By way of contrast, the long form 
set forth a host of questions that would be asked of only a 
sample of households.  In 1960, the long form was sent to 
one in every four households; in subsequent years, it was 
sent to  approximately one in every six.  See 351 F.  Supp. 
3d 502, 520 (S DNY 2019).  And it was more recently re-
placed by the American Community  Survey (ACS), which 
is sent to approximately 1  in 38 households  each year .  
The long form (and now the ACS) has often included a 
question about citizenship. 
6 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
 In 1970, the Census Bureau made another important 
change to the census.  It significantly reduced its reliance 
upon in-person enumerators.  See Anderson, supra, at 206.  
Instead, it sent nearly all households a questionnaire by 
mail.  Most households received the short form, and a 
small sample received the long form.  Instructions on the 
form told each household to fill out the questionnaire and 
return it to the Census Bureau by mail.  Enumerators 
would follow up with households that did not return the 
questionnaire. 
 To maximize ac curacy and minimize cost, the Bureau 
tried to bring about the highest possible “self -response” 
rate, i.e., to encourage as many households as possible to 
respond by mail.  For that reason, it tried to keep the 
short form as short as possible.  And it consistently op-
posed placing a citizenship question on that form.  It 
feared that adding a question about citi zenship would 
“inevitably jeopardize the overall accuracy of the popula-
tion count,” partly because of added response burden but 
also because, as it explained, noncitizens faced with a 
citizenship question would be less likely to respond due to 
fears of “th e information being used against them.”  Fed-
eration for Am. Immigration Reform v. Klutznick, 486 
F. Supp. 564, 568 (DC 1980). 
 Likely for similar reasons , Congress amended the Cen-
sus Act in 1976, enacting the two statutory provisions to 
which I previously referred.  T hese two provisions , 13 
U. S. C. §6(c) and §195, together  encourage the Secretary 
not to ask demographic questions on the short form  if the 
information can be obtained either through the long form 
or through administrative records. 
II 
 With thi s statutory and historical background, we can 
more easily consider the agency decision directly under 
review.  That decision “reinstate[s] [a] citizenship question 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 7 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
on the 2020 decennial census.”  App. to Pet. for Cert. 
549a−550a (Memorandum from Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secre-
tary of Commerce, to Karen Dunn Kelley, Under Secretary 
for Economic Affairs (Mar. 26, 2018)).  The agency’s dec i-
sion memorandum provided one and only one reason for 
making that decision —namely, that the question was 
“necessary to provide c omplete and accurate data in r e-
sponse to” a request from the Department of Justice 
(DOJ).  Id., at 562a.  The DOJ had requested the citize n-
ship question for “use [in] .  . . determining violations of 
Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.”  Id., at 548a. 
 The decision memorandum adds that the agency had not 
been able to “determine definitively how inclusion of a 
citizenship question on the decennial census will impact 
responsiveness.  However, even if there is some impact on 
responses, the value of more complete and accurate data 
derived from surveying the entire population outweighs 
such concerns.”  Id. , at 562a.  The Secretary’s decision 
thus rests upon a weighing of potentially adverse cons e-
quences (diminished responses and a less accurate census 
count) against potentially offsetting advantages (better 
citizenship data).  In my view, however, the Secretary did 
not make reasonable decisions about these potential costs 
and benefits in light of the administrative record. 
A 
 Consider first the Secretary’s conclusion that he was 
“not able to determine definitively how inclusion of a 
citizenship question on the decennial census will impact 
responsiveness.”  Ibid.   Insofar as this statement implies 
that adding the citizenship que stion is unlikely to affect 
“responsiveness” very much (or perhaps at all), the ev i-
dence in the record indicates the contrary. 
1 
 The administrative record includes repeated Census 
8 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
Bureau statements that adding the question would pr o-
duce a less accurate co unt because noncitizens and Hi s-
panics would be less likely to respond to the questionnaire.  
See App. 105, 109– 112, 158.  The Census Bureau’s chief 
scientist said specifically that adding the question would 
have “an adverse impact on self -response and, as a result, 
on the accuracy and quality of the 2020 Census.”  Id. , at 
109.  And the chief scientist backed this statement up by 
pointing to “[t]hree distinct analyses.”  Ibid. 
 The first analysis compared nonresponse rates for the 
short-form census questionn aire (which did not include a 
citizenship question) to nonresponse rates for the ACS 
(which did).  Obviously, more people fail to respond to the 
ACS than to the short form.  Yet taking into account the 
fact that the nonresponse rate will be greater for the ACS 
than for the short form, the Bureau found that the diffe r-
ence between the two is yet greater for noncitizen hous e-
holds than for citizen households (by 5.1%, according to 
the Bureau).  I d., at 111.  This led the Bureau to say that 
it was a “reasonable inference” that the presence of the 
citizenship question accounted for the difference.  Ibid. 
 The Bureau conducted two additional studies, both 
analyzing data from the ACS.  One study looked at r e-
sponse rates for particular questions on the ACS.  It 
showed that the “no answer” rate for the citizenship que s-
tion was “much greater than the comparable rates” for 
other census questions (for example, questions about age, 
sex, race, and ethnicity ).  Id. , at 110.  And it showed that 
the “no answer” rate for the ci tizenship question was 
significantly higher among Hispanics.  Id., at  109−110.  
The last study examined “break -off ” rates, i.e., the rate at 
which respondents stopped answering the questionnaire 
upon reaching a particular question.  It found that Hi s-
panics were significantly more likely than were non -
Hispanics to stop answering at the point they reached the 
citizenship question.  Id., at  112.  Together, these two 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 9 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
studies provided additional support for the Census B u-
reau’s determination that the citizenship question is likely 
to mean disproportionately fewer responses from noncit i-
zens and Hispanics than from others.  Ibid. 
 Putting numbers upon these study results, the Census 
Bureau estimated that adding the question to the short 
form would lead to 630,000 additional nonresponding 
households.  Id., at 114.  That is to say, the question would 
cause households covering more than 1 million additional 
people to decline to respond to the census.  When the 
Bureau does not receive a response, it f ollows up with in -
person interviews in an effort to obtain the missing infor-
mation.  The Bureau often interviews what it calls “prox-
ies,” such as family members and neighbors.  But this 
followup process is subject to error; and the error rate is 
much greater than the error rate for self -responses.  I bid.  
The Bureau thus explained that lower self -response rates 
“degrade data quality” by increasing the risk of error  and 
leading to hundreds of thousands of fewer correct enume r-
ations.  Id., at 113−115.  The Bureau added that its est i-
mate was “conservative.”  Id., at 115.  It expected “diffe r-
ences between citizen and noncitizen response rates and 
data quality” to be “amplified” in the 2020 census “co m-
pared to historical levels.”  Ibid.  Thus, it explained, “the 
decrease in self -response for citizen households in 2020 
could be much greater than the 5.1 percentage points [it] 
observed during the 2010 Census.”  Id. , at 115−116.  Its 
conclusion in light of this evidence was clear.  Adding the 
citizenship question to the short form was “very likely to 
reduce the self -response rate” and thereby “har[m] the 
quality of the census count.”  Id., at 105, 158. 
 The Census Bureau’s analysis received support from 
other submissions.  Several States pointed out that noncit-
izens a nd racial minorities had been undercounted in 
every prior census.  Administrative Record 1 091−1092.  
They also drew attention to recent surveys indicating that 
10 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
noncitizens had significant concerns about the confident i-
ality of census responses.  Ibid.   Form er directors of the 
Census Bureau wrote that adding the citizenship question 
so late in the process “would put the accuracy of the en u-
meration and success of the census in all communities at 
grave risk.”  Id., at 1057.  The American Sociological Asso-
ciation and Census Scientific Advisory Committee echoed 
these warnings.  See id. , at 787, 794−795.  On the other 
hand, the Secretary received submissions by other groups 
that supported adding the question.  See, e.g., id., at 
1178−1179, 1206, 1276.  But as far as I can tell (or as far 
as the arguments made here and in the District Court 
inform the matter), none of these latter submissions  
significantly added to, or detracted from, the Census 
Bureau’s submissions in respect to the question’s likely 
impact on response rates. 
2 
 The Secretary’s decision memorandum reached a quite 
different conclusion from the Census Bureau.  The mem o-
randum conceded that “a lower response rate would lead 
to . . . less accurate responses.”  App. to Pet. for Cert. 556a.  
But it concluded that neither the Census Bureau nor any 
stakeholders had provided “definitive, empirical support” 
for the proposition that the citizenship question would 
reduce response rates.  Id., at 554a.  The memorandum 
relied for that conclusion upon a number of considerations, 
but each is contradicted by the record. 
 The memorandum first pointed to perceived shortco m-
ings in the Census Bureau’s analysis of nonresponse rates.  
It noted that response rates are generally lower overall for 
the long form and A CS than they are for the short form.  
Id., at 552a−554a.  But the Bureau explained that its 
analysis accounted for this consideration, see App. 111, 
and no one has given us reason to think the contrary.   The 
Secretary also noted that the Bureau “was not able to 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 11 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
isolate what percentage of [the] decline was caused by the 
inclusion of a citizenship question rather than some other 
aspect of the long form survey.”  App. to Pet. for Cert. 
554a.  But the Bureau said attributing the decline to the 
citizenship quest ion was a “reasonable inference,” App. 
111, and again, nothing in the record contradicted the 
Bureau’s judgment.  And later analyses have borne out the 
Bureau’s judgment that the citizenship question contri b-
utes to the decline in self -response.  See, e.g., id., at  
1002−1006, 1008 (August 2018 Census Bureau study). 
 The memorandum next cast doubt on the Census B u-
reau’s analysis of the rate at which people responded to 
particular questions on the ACS.  It noted that the “no 
answer” rate to the citizenship question was comparable to 
the “no answer” rate for other questions on the ACS, in-
cluding educational attainment, income, and property 
insurance.  App. to Pet. for Cert. 553a.  But as discussed 
above, the Bureau found it significant that the “no an-
swer” rate for the citizenship question was “much greater” 
than the “no answer” rate for the other questions that 
appear on the short form—that is, the form on which the 
citizenship question would appear.  App. 110, 124.  The 
Secretary offered no reason why the demog raphic vari a-
bles to which he pointed provided a better point of 
comparison. 
 Finally, the memorandum relied on information provided 
by two outside stakeholders.  The first was a study con-
ducted by the private survey company Nielsen, in which 
questions about place of birth and time of arrival had not 
led to any appreciable decrease in the response rate.  App. 
to Pet. for Cert. 552a.   But Nielsen, which in fact urged 
the Secretary not to add the question, stated that its re-
spondents (unlike census respondents ) were paid  to r e-
spond, and it is consequently not surprising that they did 
so.  Administrative Record 1276.  The memo - 
randum also cited statements by former Census Bureau 
12 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
officials suggesting that empirical evidence about the 
question’s potential impact on response rates was “lim-
ited.”  App. to Pet. for Cert. 558a−559a; see also id., at 
552a.  But there was no reason to expect the former off i-
cials to provide more extensive empirical evidence as to a 
citizenship question when they were not privy to the 
internal Bureau analyses on this question.   And, like 
Nielsen, the former officials strongly urged the Secretary 
not to ask the question.  See Administrative Record 1057. 
 The upshot is that the Secretary received evidence of a 
likely drop in census accuracy by a number somewhere in 
the hundreds of thousands, and he received nothing signif-
icant to the contrary.  The Secretary pointed out that the 
Census Bureau’s information was uncertain, i.e. , not 
“definitive.”  But that is not a satisfactory answer.  Few 
public-policy-related statistical studies of risks (say, of 
many health or safety matters) are definitive.  As the 
Court explained in State Farm , “[i]t is not infrequent th at 
the available data do not settle a regulatory issue, and the 
agency must then exercise its judgment in moving from 
the facts and probabilities on the record to a policy conclu-
sion.”  463 U.  S., at 52.  But an agency confronted with 
this situation cannot “merely recite the terms ‘substantial 
uncertainty’ as a justification for its actions.”  Ibid.  In-
stead, it “must explain the evidence which is available” 
and typically must offer a reasoned explanation for taking 
action without “engaging in a search for further evidence.”  
Ibid. 
 The Secretary did not do so here.  He did not explain 
why he made the decision to add the question without 
following the Bureau’s ordinary practice of extensively 
testing proposed changes to the census questionnaire.  See 
App. 624−630, 641 ( discussing testing process); see also, 
e.g., Brief for Former Census Bureau Directors as Amici 
Curiae 17−21 (discussing prior examples of questions that 
the Bureau decided not to add after many years of pretest-
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 13 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
ing).  Without that testing, the Secretary could not treat 
the Bureau’s expert opinions and its  experience with the 
relevant surveys  as worthless merely because its conclu-
sions were not precise.  The Bureau’s opinions were  
properly considered as evidence of likelihoods, probabili-
ties, or risks. 
 As noted above, the consequences of mistakes in the 
census count, of even a few hundred thousand, are grave.  
Differences of a few thousand people, as between one State 
and another, can mean a loss or gain of a congressional 
seat—a matter of great consequence to a State.  See 351 
F. Supp. 3d, at 594 .  And similar small differences can 
make a large difference to the allocation of federal funds 
among competing state programs.  Id. , at 596−597; see 
also Baldrige, 455 U. S., at 353−354, n. 9.  If near-absolute 
certainty is what the Secretary meant by “definitive,” that 
insistence would itself be arbitrary in light of the constit u-
tional and statutory consequences at stake.  And if the 
Secretary instead meant that the evidence does not indi-
cate a serious risk of a less accurate count, that conclusion 
does not find support in the record. 
B 
 Now consider the Secretary’s conclusion that, even if 
adding a citizenship question diminishes the accuracy of 
the enumeration, “the value of more complete and acc u-
rate da ta derived from surveying the entire population 
outweighs . . . concerns” about diminished accuracy.  App. 
to Pet. for Cert. 562a (emphasis added).  That conclusion 
was also arbitrary.  The administrative record indicates 
that adding a citizenship question to the short form would 
produce less “complete and accurate data,” not more. 
1 
 The Census Bureau informed the Secretary that, for 
about 90% of the population, accurate citizenship data is 
14 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
available from administrative records maintained by the 
Social Security Administration and Internal Revenue 
Service.  App. 146.  The Bureau further informed the 
Secretary that it had “high confidence” that it could develop 
a statistical model that would accurately impute citizen-
ship status for the remaining 10% of the population.  I bid.  
The Bureau stated that these methods  alone—using exist-
ing administrative records for 90% of the population and 
statistical modeling for the remaining 10% —would yield 
more accurate citizenship data than also asking a citizen-
ship question.  Id. , at  159.  How could that be so?  The 
answer is somewhat technical but readily understandable. 
 First, consider the 90% of the population (about 295 
million people) as to w hom administrative records are 
available.  The Gover nment agrees that using these  
administrative records would provide highly reliable 
information about citizenship, because the records  “re-
quire proof of citizenship.”  Id., at  117.  By contrast, if 
responses to a citizenship question were used for this 
group, the Census Bureau predicted without contradiction 
that about one -third of the noncitizens in this group who 
respond would answer the question untruthfully, claiming 
to be citizens when they are not.  Id. , at 147.  Those incor-
rect answers —about 9.5 milli on in total —would conflict 
with the administrative records on file for those noncit i-
zens.  And what would the Census Bureau do with the 
conflicting data?  If it accepts the answer to the citizenship 
question as determinative, it will have less accurate dat a.  
If it accepts the citizenship data from administrative 
records as determinative, asking the question will have 
served no purpose. 
 Thus, as to 295 million people —the overwhelming m a-
jority of the population —asking the citizenship question 
would at best add nothing at all.  I say “at best” because , 
for one thing,  the Census Bureau informed the Secretary 
that asking the question would produce 1  million more 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 15 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
people who could not be linked to administrative records, 
which in turn would require the Census Bur eau to resort 
to a less accurate source of citizenship data for these 
people.  See id. , at 147−149; see also 351 F.  Supp. 3d, at 
538−539.  For another, the policy of the Census Bureau 
has always been to use census responses rather than 
administrative recor ds i n cases where the two conflict.   
App. 147.  In this case, that practice would mean accepting 
9.5 million inaccurate responses even though accurate 
administrative records are available.  See ibid.  The Census 
Bureau could perhaps change that practice, but the Secre-
tary’s decision memorandum said nothing about the 
matter.  It did not address the problem. 
 Second, consider the remaining 10% of the population 
(about 35 million people) for whom the Government lack s 
administrative records.  The question here is which a p-
proach would yield the most “complete and accurate” 
citizenship data for this group —adding a citizenship  
question or using statistical modeling  alone?  To answer 
this question, we must  further divide this group into two 
categories—those who would respond to the citizenship 
question if it were asked and those who would not. 
 Start with the category of about 22 million people who 
would answer a citizenship question if it were asked.  
Would their answers regarding citizenship be more acc u-
rate than citizenship data produced by statistical mode l-
ing?  The Census Bureau said no.  That is because many of 
the noncitizens in this group would answer the question 
falsely, resulting in an estimated 500,000 inaccurat e 
answers.  See id., at  148.  And those who answer the 
question falsely would be com mingled, perhaps randomly, 
with those who answer it correctly, thereby casting doubt 
on the answers of all 22 million, with no way of knowing 
which answers are correct and which are false.  By co n-
trast, the Bureau believed that it could develop a statisti-
cal model that would produce more accurate citizenship 
16 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
data than these census responses.  The Bureau therefore 
informed the Secretary that it could do better.  As the 
Bureau’s chief scientist explained , although “ [o]ne might 
think” that asking the question “ could help fill the .  . . 
gaps” in the administrative records, the data did not su p-
port that assumption.  Id., at 157.  Instead, he explained,  
responses to the citizenship question “may not be reliable,” 
which “calls into question their ability to improve upon” 
the Bureau’s statistical modeling process.  Ibid. 
 Next, turn to the more than 13 million remaining people 
who would not answer the citizenship question even if it 
were asked.  As to this category, the Census Bureau would 
still need to use statistical modeling  to obtain citizenship 
data, because there would be no census response  to use 
instead.  Hence, asking the citizenship question would add 
nothing at all as to this group.  To the contrary, as the 
Government concedes, asking the question would reduce 
the accuracy of the citizenship data for this group, because 
the relatively inaccurate answers to the c itizenship ques-
tion would diminish the overall accuracy of the Census 
Bureau’s statistical model.  See Brief  for Petitioners 34 
(conceding that the Census Bureau model will be “highe [r] 
quality” without the question than with it); 351 F.  Supp. 
3d, at 640 ( explaining that asking the question would 
“corrup[t] . . . the data generated by extrapolating from 
self-responses through imputation”). 
 In sum, in respect to the 295 million persons for whom 
administrative records exist, asking the question on the 
short form would, at best, be no improvement over using 
administrative records alone.  And in respect to the re-
maining 35 million people for whom no administrative 
records exist, asking the question would be no better, and 
in some respects would be worse,  than u sing statistical 
modeling.  The Census Bureau therefore told the Secr e-
tary that asking the citizenship question, even in addition 
to using administrative records, “would result in poorer 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 17 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
quality citizenship data” than using administrative re c-
ords alone, and would “still have all the negative cost and 
quality implications” of asking the citizenship question.  
App. 159.   I could find no evidence contradicting that 
prediction. 
2 
 If my description of the record is correct, it raises a 
serious legal problem.  H ow can an agency support the 
decision to add a question to the short form, thereby risk-
ing a significant undercount of the population, on the 
ground that it will improve the accuracy of citizenship 
data, when in fact the evidence indicates that adding the 
question will harm the accuracy of citizenship data?  Of 
course it cannot.  But , as I have just said, I have not been 
able to find evidence to suggest that adding the question 
would result in more accurate citizenship data.  Neither 
could the District Cour t.  After reviewing the record in 
detail, the District Court found that “all of the relevant 
evidence before Secretary Ross —all of it —demonstrated 
that using administrative records . . . would actually 
produce more accurate [citizenship] data than adding a  
citizenship question to the census.”  351 F. Supp. 3d,  
at 650. 
 What consideration did the Secretary give to this pro b-
lem?  He stated simply that “[a]sking the citizenship 
question of 100 percent of the population gives each r e-
spondent the opportunity to  provide an answer,” which 
“may eliminate the need for the Census Bureau to have to 
impute an answer for millions of people.”  App. to Pet. for 
Cert. 556a.  He therefore must have assumed, sub silentio, 
exactly what the Census Bureau experts urged him not to 
assume—that answers to the citizenship question would 
be more accurate than statistical modeling.  And he i g-
nored the undisputed respects in which asking the que s-
tion would make the existing data less accurate.  Other 
18 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
than his assumption, the Secretary said nothing, absolutely 
nothing, to suggest a reasoned basis for disagreeing with 
the Bureau’s expert statistical judgment. 
 The Government now maintains that the Secretary 
reasonably discounted the Census Bureau’s recommend a-
tion because it was based on a n untested prediction about 
the accuracy of its model.  But this is not a case in which 
the Secretary was presented with a policy choice between 
two reasonable but uncertain options.  For one thing, the 
record is much less uncertain than the Government 
acknowledges.  Although it is true that the Census Bureau 
at one point told the Secretary that it could not “quantify 
the relative magnitude of the errors across the altern a-
tives at this time,” App. 148, it unequivocally stated that 
asking the question “would result in poorer quality citizen-
ship data” than omitting it, id., at 159 (emphasis added).  
Thus, even if the Bureau could not “quantify” the relative 
accuracy of the options, it could and did conclude that one 
option was likely more accurate than the oth er.  Even in 
the face of some uncertainty, where all available ev i-
dence indicates that one option is better than the other, 
it is unreasonable to choose the worse option without 
explanation. 
 For another thing, to the extent the record reflects some 
uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the Census Bureau’s 
statistical model, that is because the model needed to be 
“developed and tested” before it could be employed.  Id., at 
146.  But the Secretary made his decision before any such 
development or testing could be completed.  Having decided 
to make an immediate decision rather than wait for tes t-
ing, the Secretary could not dismiss the Bureau’s predi c-
tion about the inadvisability of that decision on the ground 
that the prediction reflected likelihoods, probabilities, and 
risks rather than certainties. 
 Finally, recall that  the Census Act requires  the Secr e-
tary to use administrative records rather than direct 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 19 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
inquiries to “the maximum extent possible.”  13 U.  S. C. 
§6(c).  That statutory requirement highlights what should 
be obvious: Whether adding a citizenship question to the 
short form would produce more accurate  citizenship data 
is a relevant factor—indeed, a critically important factor—
that the Secretary was required to consider.  Here, the 
Secretary did not adequately explain why he rejected the 
evidence that adding the question would yield less acc u-
rate data.  He did not even acknowledge that the Census 
Act obliged him to use administrative records  rather than 
asking a question to the extent possible.  And he did not 
explain how obtaining citizenship data that is no better or 
worse than the data otherwise available could j ustify 
jeopardizing the accuracy of the census count. 
 In these respects, the Secretary failed to consider “i m-
portant aspect[s] of the problem” and “offered an explan a-
tion for [his] decision that runs counter to the evidence 
before the agency.”  State Farm, 463 U. S., at 43. 
C 
 The Secretary’s failure to consider th is evidence—that 
adding the question would harm the census count in the 
interest of obtaining less accurate  citizenship data —
provides a sufficient basis for setting the decision aside.  
But there is more.  The reason that the Secretary provided 
for needing more accurate citizenship information in the 
first place —to help the DOJ enforce the Voting Rights 
Act—is unconvincing. 
 The Secretary stated that adding the citizenship que s-
tion was “necessary to provide complete and accurate data 
in response to the DOJ request.”  App. to Pet. for Cert.  
562a.  The DOJ’s request in turn asserted that the citize n-
ship data currently available from the ACS was not “ideal” 
for enforcing the Voting Rights Act.  Id. , at 567a.  One of 
the DOJ’s principal complaint s was that ACS data is 
reported for groups of census blocks rather than for each 
20 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
census block itself.  The DOJ  letter stated that adding a 
citizenship question could provide it with individual block-
by-block data which, the DOJ maintained, would allow it 
to better enforce the Voting Rights Act’s protections for 
minority voters.  Id., at 568a. 
 This rationale is difficult to accept .  One obvious prob-
lem is that the DOJ provided no basis to believe that more 
precise data would in fact help with Voting Rights Act 
enforcement.  Congress enacted the Voting Rights Act in 
1965—15 years after the census last asked every hous e-
hold about citizenship.  Actions to enforce the Act have 
therefore always used citizenship data de rived from sa m-
pling.  Yet I am aware of no one—not in the Department of 
Commerce proceeding, in the District Court, or in this 
Court—who has provided a single example in which en-
forcement of the Act has suffered due to lack of more 
precise citizenship data .  Organizations with expertise  in 
this area tell us that asking the citizenship question will 
not help enforce the Act.  See, e.g., Brief for NAACP Legal 
Defense & Educational Fund, Inc., as Amicus Curiae  
30−36.  Rather, the question will, by depressing t he count 
of minority groups, hurt those whom the Act seeks to help.  
See, e.g., Brief for Leadership Conference on Civil and 
Human Rights et al. as Amici Curiae 21−29. 
 Another problem with the Secretary’s rationale is that, 
even assuming the DOJ needed more detailed citizenship 
data, there were better ways of obtaining the needed data.  
The Census Bureau offered to provide the DOJ with data 
using administrative records, which, as I have pointed out, 
are likely just as accurate, if not more accurate, than 
responses to a citizenship question.  The Census Bureau 
offered to provide this data at the census block level, 
which would resolve each of the DOJ’s complaints about  
the existing ACS data.  See Administrative Record 3289.  
But the Secretary rejected this alternative without e x-
plaining why it would not fully r espond to the DOJ’s r e-
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 21 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
quest.  That failure was particularly problematic given 
that the Census Act requires the Secr etary to use other 
methods of obtaining demographic inform ation if at all 
possible.  See §§6(c), 195. 
 Normally, the Secretary would be entitled to place 
considerable weight upon the DOJ’s expertise in matters 
involving the Voting Rights Act, but there are  strong 
reasons for discounting that expertise here.  The admini s-
trative record shows that DOJ’s request to add a citize n-
ship question originated not with the DOJ, but with the 
Secretary himself.  See  Administrative Record 3710.  The 
Voting Rights Act rati onale was in fact first proposed by 
Commerce Department officials.  See ibid.  DOJ officials, 
for their part , were initially uninterested in obtaining 
more detailed citizenship data,  App. 414, and they agreed 
to request the data only after the Secretary pe rsonally 
spoke to the Attorney General about the matter, see A d-
ministrative Record 2651.  And when the acting director of 
the Census Bureau proposed alternative means of obtain-
ing better citizen ship data, DOJ officials declined to meet 
to discuss the proposal.  See id., at 3460. 
 Taken as a whole, the evidence in the administrative 
record indicates that the Voting Rights Act rationale 
offered by the Secretary was not just unconvincing, but 
pretextual.  And, as the Court concludes, further evidence 
outside the administrative record but present in the trial 
record supports the finding of pretext.  See Part V, ante.  
Among other things, t hat evidence reveals that the DOJ 
official who wrote the letter agreed that adding the que s-
tion “is not necessary for DOJ’s V RA enforcement efforts.”  
App. 1113.  And that official further acknowledged that he 
did not “know whether or not [citizenship] data produced 
from responses to the citizenship question .  . . will, in fact, 
be more precise than the [citizenship] data on which the 
DOJ is currently relying for purposes of VRA enforc e-
ment.”  Id., at 1102.  
22 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
 The Court explains, and I agree, that a court normally 
should not “reject an agency’s stated reasons for act ing 
simply because the agency might also have had other 
unstated reasons.”  Ante, at 24 .  But in this case, “ the 
evidence tells a story that does not match the explanation 
the Secretary gave for his decision .”  A nte, at 27.  This 
evidence strongly suggests  that the Secretary ’s stated 
rationale was pretextual.  I consequently join Part V of the 
Court’s opinion (except insofar as it concludes that the 
Secretary’s decision was reasonable apart from the que s-
tion of pretext).  And I agree that the pretextual nature of 
the Secretary’s decision provides a sufficient basis to 
affirm the District Court’s decision to send the matter 
back to the agency. 
*  *  * 
 I agree with the Court that the APA gives agencies 
broad leeway to carry out their legislatively delegated 
duties.  And I recognize that Congress has specifically 
delegated to the Secretary of Commerce the authority to 
conduct a census of the population “in such form and 
content as he may determine.”  §141(a).  But although this 
delegation is broad, it is not without limits.  The APA 
supplies one such limit.  In an effort to ensure rational 
decisionmaking, the APA prohibits an agency from ma k-
ing decisions that are “arbitrary, capricious, [or] an abuse 
of discretion.”  5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A). 
 This provision, of course, does not insist that dec i-
sionmakers think through every minor aspect of every 
problem that they face.  But here, the Secretary’s decision 
was a major one, potentially affecting the proper workings 
of our democratic government and the proper allocatio n of 
hundreds of billions of dollars in federal funds.  Cf. ante, at 
10.  Yet the decision was ill considered in a number of 
critically important respects.  The Secretary did not give 
adequate consideration to issues that should have been 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 23 
 
Opinion of BREYER, J. 
central to his judgment, such as the  high likelihood of an 
undercount, the low likelihood that a question would yield  
more accurate citizenship data, and the apparent lack of 
any need for more accurate citizenship data to begin with.  
The Secretary’s failures in considering those critical issues 
make his decision unreasonable.  They are the kinds of 
failures for which, in my view, the APA’s arbitrary and 
capricious provision was written. 
 As I have said, I agree with the Court’s conclusion as to 
pretext and with the decision to send the matter back to 
the agency.  I do not agree, however, with several of the 
Court’s conclusions concerning application of the arbitrary 
and capri cious standard.  In my view, the Secretary’s 
decision—whether pretextual or not— was arbitrary, 
capricious, and an abuse of his lawfully delegated discr e-
tion.  I consequently concur in the Court’s judgment to the 
extent that it affirms the judgment of the District Court. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 1 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 18–966 
_________________ 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, ET AL., PETITIONERS 
v. NEW YORK, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI BEFORE JUDGMENT TO THE UNITED 
STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
[June 27, 2019] 
 JUSTICE ALITO, concurring in part and dissenting in 
part. 
 It is a sign of our time that the inclusion of a question 
about citizenship on the census has become a subject of 
bitter public controversy and has led to today’s regrettable 
decision.  While the decision to place such a question on 
the 2020 census questionnaire is attacked as racist, there 
is a broad international consensus that inquiring about 
citizenship on a census is not just appropriate but advis a-
ble.  No one disputes that it is important to know how 
many inhabitants of this country are citizens. 1  And the 
most direct way to gather this information is to ask for i t 
in a census.  The  United Nations recommends that  
a census inquire about citizenship, 2 and many countries  
—————— 
1 As a 2016 Census Bureau guidance document explained, obtaining 
citizenship statistics is “essential for agencies and policy makers setting 
and evaluating im migration policies and laws, understanding how 
different immigrant groups are assimilated, and monitoring against 
discrimination.”  Dept. of Commerce, Census Bureau,  American Com-
munity Survey, Why We Ask: Place of Birth, Citizenship and Yea r of 
Entry, www2.census. gov /programs - surveys / acs / about / qbyqfact / 2016 / 
Citizenship.pdf (all Internet materials as last visited June 25, 2019). 
2 United Nations, Dept. of Economic and Social Affairs Statistics Div., 
Principles and Recommendations for Population and Housing Censuses 
163, 191 (rev. 3, 2017). 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
2 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
do so.3 
 Asking about citizenship on the census also has a rich 
history in our country.  Every census, from the very first 
one in 1790 to the most recent in 2010, has sought not just 
a count of the number of inhabitants but also varying 
amounts of additional demographic information.  In 1800, 
Thomas Jefferson, as president of the American Philo-
sophical Society, signed a letter to Congress asking for the 
inclusion on the census of questions regarding “  ‘the r e-
spective numbers of native citizens, citizens of foreign 
birth, and of aliens ’ ” “ ‘for the purpose .  . . of more exactly 
distinguishing the increase of population by birth and 
immigration.’ ”  C. Wright,  History and Growth of the 
United States Census (prepared for the Senate Committee 
on the Census), S. Doc. No. 194 , 56th Cong., 1st Sess. , 19 
(1900).  In 1820, John Quincy Adams, as Secretary of 
State, was responsible  for con ducting the census, and  
consistent with the 1820 Census Act, he instructed the 
marshals who were charged with gathering the info r-
mation to ask about citizenship. 4  In 1830, when Martin 
Van Buren was Secretary of State, a question about  citi-
zenship was agai n included. 5  With the exception of the 
census of 1840, at least some portion of the population was 
asked a question about citizenship as part of the census 
through 2000, after which the question was moved to the 
American Community Survey, which is sent to  only a 
small fraction of the population.  All these census inquiries 
—————— 
3 See, e.g., Brief for Petitioner s 29 (“  ‘[O]ther major democracies i n-
quire about citizenship on their census, including Australia, Canada, 
France, Germany, Indon esia, Ireland, Mexico, Spain, and the United 
Kingdom, to name a few’ ” (quoting App. to Pet. for Cert. 561a)). 
4 See Act of Mar.  14, 1820, ch. 24, 3 Stat. 550; Wright, History and 
Growth of the United States Census , S. Doc. No. 194 , 56th Cong., 1st 
Sess., 133–137. 
5 See Dept. of Commerce, Census Bureau, History: 1830 Census Ques-
tionnaire, https: / /www . census . gov /history /www /through _ the _ decades / 
questionnaires/1830_2.html. 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 3 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
were made by the Executive pursuant to congressional 
authorization.  None were reviewed by the courts. 
 Now, for the first time, this Court has seen fit to claim  a 
role with respect to the inclusion of a citizenship question 
on the census, and in doing so, the Court has set a danger-
ous precedent, both with regard to the census itself and 
with regard to judicial review of all other executive agency 
actions.  For the reasons ably stated by JUSTICE THOMAS, 
see ante, p. ___ (opinion concurring in part and dissenting 
in part),  today’s decision is either an aberration or a li-
cense for widespread judicial inquiry into the motivations 
of Executive Branch officials.  If thi s case is taken as a 
model, then any one of the approximately 1 ,000 district 
court judges in this country, upon receiving information 
that a controversial agency decision might have been 
motivated by some unstated consideration, may order the 
questioning o f Cabinet officers and other high- ranking 
Executive Branch officials, and the judge may then pass 
judgment on whether the decision was pretextual.  What 
Bismarck is reputed to have said about laws and sausages 
comes to mi nd.  And that goes for decisionmaking by all 
three branches. 
 To put the point bluntly, the F ederal Judiciary has no 
authority to stick its nose into the question whether it is 
good policy to include a citizenship question on the census 
or whether the reasons given by Secretary Ross for tha t 
decision were his only reasons or his real reasons.  Of 
course, we may determine whether the decision is const i-
tutional.  But under the considerations that typically 
guide this Cou rt in the exercise of its power  of judicial 
review of agency action, we ha ve no authority to decide 
whether the Secretary’s decision was rendered in compl i-
ance with the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). 
I 
 The APA authorizes judicial review of “agency action” 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
4 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
taken i n violation of law, 5 U.  S. C. §§ 706(2)(A)–(D), but 
§701(a)(2) of the APA bars judicial review of agency ac-
tions that are “committed to agency discretion by law.”  
Although we have characteri zed the scope of §701(a)(2) as 
“ ‘narrow,’ ” Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.  S. 821, 830 (1985), 
there are circumstances in which it applies.  And while 
our cases recognize a strong presumption in favor of jud i-
cial review of agency action, see, e.g. , Weyerhaeuser Co. v. 
United States Fish and Wildlife Serv. , 586 U.  S. ___ , ___  
(2018) (slip op., at 11), this “is  ‘just’ a presumption,” and 
like all real presumptions, it may be (and has been) rebut-
ted, Lincoln v. Vigil, 508 U. S. 182, 190 (1993).6 
 In considering whether the general presumption in 
favor of judicial review has been rebutted in specific cases, 
we have identified factors that are relevant to the inquiry: 
whether the text and structure of the relevant s tatutes 
leave a court with any “  ‘meaningful standard against 
which to judge the a gency’s exercise of discretion,’  ” Web-
ster v. Doe, 486 U.  S. 592, 600 (1988) (quoting Heckler, 
supra, at 830); whether the matter at hand has traditio n-
ally been viewed as committed to agency discretion, see 
ICC v. Locomotive Engineers, 482 U.  S. 270, 282 (1987); 
whether the challenged action manifests a “general un-
suitability” for judicial review because it involves a “com-
plicated balancing of a number of factors,” including 
judgments regarding the allocation of agency resources or 
matters otherwise committed to another b ranch, Heckler, 
supra, at 831– 832; and whether judici al review would 
produce “disruptive practical consequences,” Southern R. 
—————— 
6 Because the §701(a)(2) analysis dictates whether APA review may be 
had, JUSTICE BREYER’s assertion that the APA “supplies [a] limit” on 
the Secretary’s otherwise “broad” delegation, ante , at 22 (opinion 
concurring in part and dissenting in part) , mistakenly assumes the 
answer to the reviewability questio n.  Cf. Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.  S. 
821, 828 (1985) (“[B]efore any review at all may be had, a party must 
first clear the hurdle of §701(a)”). 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 5 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
Co. v. Seaboard Allied Milling Corp. , 442 U.  S. 444 , 457  
(1979) (applying this factor to the reviewability inquiry 
under §701(a)(1)). 
 Applying those factors,  I conclude that the decision of 
the Secretary of Commerce to add core demographic que s-
tions to the decennial census questionnaire is committed 
to agency discretion by law and therefore may not be 
challenged under the APA.7 
II 
A 
 I start with the question whether the relevant statutory 
provisions provide any standard that courts can apply in 
reviewing the Secretary’s decision to restore a citizenship 
question to the census.  The provision that directly a d-
dresses this question is 13 U.  S. C. §141(a), the sta tute 
that vests the Secretary with authority to administer the 
decennial census.  This provision gives the Secretary 
unfettered discretion to include on the census questions 
about basic demographic characteristics like citizenship.  
It begins by providing that the Secretary 
“shall, in the year 1980 and every 10 years thereafter, 
take a decennial census of population . . . in such form 
and content as he may determine, including the use of 
sampling procedures and special surveys.”  Ibid. 
(emphasis added). 
 The two phrases I have highlighted —“census of popula-
tion” and “in such form and content as he may dete r-
mine”—are of immediate importance.  A “census of popu - 
—————— 
7 The Government concedes that courts may review constitutional 
challenges to the Secretary’s actions.  Cf. Webs ter v. Doe, 486 U. S. 592, 
603 (1988).  For the reasons given in the Court’s  opinion, see ante , at 
11–13, I agree that the only remaining constitutional claim at issue —
respondents’ Enumeration Clause claim—lacks merit and thus does not 
constitute a basis for enjoining the addition of the citizenship question. 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
6 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
lation” is broader than a mere head count.  The term is 
defined as “a census of population . . . and matters relating 
to population .”  §141(g ) (emphasis added).  Because this 
definition refers to both “a census of population” and 
“matters relating to population,” the latter concept must 
include more than a “census of population”  in the strict 
sense of a head count.  And it seems obvious that what 
this additional information must include is the sort of 
basic demographic information that has long been sought 
in the census.  So the statute clearly authorizes the Secre-
tary to gather such information. 
 The second phrase, “in such form and content as he may 
determine,” specifies how this information is to be gat h-
ered, namely, by a method having the “form and content” 
that the Secretary “may determine.”  In other words, this 
is left purely to the Secretary’s discretion.  A clearer and 
less restricted conferral of discretion is hard to imagine. 
 It is instructive to compare this delegation of authority 
to the statutory language at issue in one of our most well -
known §701(a)(2) cases, Webster v. Doe, 486 U.  S. 592.  
There, the relevant statute allowed termination of a Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency employee whenever the Director 
“shall deem such termination necessary or advisable in 
the interests of the United States.”  Id. , at 600 (internal 
quotation marks omitted and emphasis deleted) .  Reaso n-
ing that the statute’s “shall deem ” standard “fairly exudes 
deference to the Director,” the Court concluded that the 
text of the statute “appear[ed] . . . to foreclose the applic a-
tion of any meaningful judicial standard of review.”  Ibid. 
 The §141(a) language discussed above is even more 
sweeping than that of the statute in Webster.  Unlike the 
Census Act, the statute in Webster placed a condition on 
the Director’s action —in particular, the requirement th at 
he terminate an employee only after concluding that doing 
so would further the “interests of the United States.”  No 
such condition applies to the Secretary’s determination 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 7 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
about the form and content of the decennial census, a f act 
that distinguishes the statute at issue here from others 
this Court has found to fall outside §701(a)(2)  and thus 
within courts’ power to review .  See, e.g., Weyerhaeuser 
Co., 586 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 10)  (statute conditioning 
agency power to ex clude land from critical habitat desi g-
nation on agency’s consideration of “  ‘economic impact’ ” of 
designation and “ ‘determin[ation] that the benefits of such 
exclusion outweigh the benefits of specifying such area as 
part of the critical habitat’ ”). 
B 
 Those arguing in favor of judicial review contend that 
the §141(a) language that I have discussed so far is limited 
by language that follows immediately after.  That pa rt of 
§141(a) states: 
“In connection with any such census [i.e., the decennial 
“census o f population ”], the Secretary is authorized  
to obtain such other census information as necessary .”  
(Emphasis added.) 
 This means, it is argued, that information about citize n-
ship may be obtained by means of the census only if that is 
“necessary.”  But thi s argument is clearly wrong.  The 
information that must be “necessary” (whatever that 
means in this context) is “ other census information.”  That 
refers to information other than that obtained in the 
“census of population,” and as explained, the term “cens us 
of population” includes not just a head count but other 
“matters relating to population,” a category that enco m-
passes basic demographic information such as citizenship.  
Accordingly, this argument is definitively refuted by the 
text of §141.  And although it is not necessary to look 
beyond that text, it is worth noting that this argument, if 
accepted, would require that the term “necessary” be given 
a less than strictly literal meaning; otherwise, it would 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
8 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
run contrary to the bro ad delegation effected by the first 
portion of §141(a) by making it all but impossible for the 
Secretary to include on the census anything other than 
questions relating to the number of persons living at a 
particular address.  That would be so because it w ill often 
not be “necessary” to obtain this information via the ce n-
sus rather than by some other means. 
C 
 Another argument in favor of review relies on 13 
U. S. C. §195, which states: 
“Except for the determination of population for pu r-
poses of apportionment of Representatives in Co n-
gress among the several States, the Secretary shall, if 
he considers it feasible, authorize the use of the statis-
tical method known as ‘sampling’ in carrying out  the 
provisions of this title.” 
JUSTICE BREYER, for exam ple, interprets this provision to 
mean that “the Secretary must, if feasible, obtain dem o-
graphic information through a survey sent to a sample of 
households, rather than through the short -form census 
questionnaire to which every household must respond.”  
Ante, at 3  (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in 
part).  Under that reading of §195, it is asserted, the pr o-
vision sets forth a judicially reviewable limit on the Secr e-
tary’s authority to obtain information through direct 
inquiries. 
 This argument f ails to take into account that the cu r-
rent version of §195 was enacted as part of the same Act of 
Congress that included the present version of §141 8 and 
that the two provisions are both parts of a unified scheme 
regarding the use of sampling.  Section 141, a provision 
concerned exclusively with the census, addresses the use 
—————— 
8 See 90 Stat. 2459. 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 9 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
of sampling in that particular conte xt.  I previously  
quoted the relevant langua ge, but I repeat it now so that  
it is clearly in mind.  Section 141 (a) provides that the 
Secretary  
“shall, in the year 1980 and every 10 years thereafter, 
take a decennial census of population . . . in such form 
and content as h e may determine, including the use of 
sampling procedures and special surveys .”  (Emphasis 
added.) 
What this means is that the Secretary, in conducting the 
“census of population,” has discretion to choose the form 
and content of the vehicle s used in that p roject, and 
among the methods that he may employ, if he sees fit, are 
sampling and special surveys. 
 Section 195 is not a census-specific provision, but it does 
have one (important) thing to say specifically about the 
census: It prohibits the use of sampli ng “for the determi-
nation of population for purposes of apportionment of 
Representatives in Congress.”  In this one way, it qualifies 
the Secretary’s discretion regarding the “form and co n-
tent” of the vehicles used in conducting the “census of 
population.”  And that is what we meant in Department of 
Commerce v. United States House of Representatives , 525 
U. S. 316, 338 (1999), when we said that §141(a)’s “broad 
grant of authority . . . is informed . . . by the narrower and 
more specific §195.”  Otherwise, the text of §195 does not 
deal specifically with the census.  It addresses all the 
many information- gathering activities conducted by the 
Commerce Department, and as to these, it says that the 
Secretary shall use sampling if he deems it “feasible.” 
 If §195 were read to mean that no information other 
than a head count can be sought by means of a census 
questionnaire unless it is not “feasible” to get that infor-
mation by sampling, then there would be little if anything 
left of the broad discretion “to use sam pling techniques” 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
10 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
conferred on the Secretary by §141(a).   “Feasible” means 
“capable of being done, executed, or effected,” Webster’s 
Third New International Dictionary 831 (196 1), and it is 
not clear that the gathering of any core demographic 
information is not “capable of being done” by sampling.  So 
if that were what §195 means, then Congress, in the same 
Act, would have given the Secretary discretion to use 
sampling in the census “as he may determine” but also 
compelled him to us e sampling in almost all instances.  
That is no way to read the provisions of a single Act.  A 
law’s provisions should be read to work together.   See A. 
Scalia & B. Garner, Reading Law 180  (2012) (“The provi-
sions of a text should be interpreted in a way th at renders 
them compatible, not contradictory”).  See also, e.g. , Par-
ker Drilling Management Services, Ltd.  v. Newton, 587 
U. S. ___, ___– ___ (2019) (slip op., at 5 –6); Star Athletica, 
L. L. C. v. Varsity Brands, Inc. , 580 U.  S. ___, ___– ___ 
(2017) (slip op., at 6– 7); Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd.  v. 
Regal-Beloit Corp., 561 U. S. 89, 108 (2010). And if there is 
tension between a specific provision, like §141 ’s instru c-
tion regarding the use of sampling in the decennial census, 
and a general one, like §195’s directive regarding the use 
of sampling in all data -collection activities , the specific 
provision must take precedence.  Cf. NLRB v. SW General, 
Inc., 580 U. S. ___, ___ (2017) (slip op., at 14). 
 When §§141 and 195 are read in this way, it is easy to 
see how they fit together.  In using the census to gather 
information “relating to population” for any use other than 
the actual enumeration, the Secretary may use sampling 
“as he may determine.”  In conducting all the Depar t-
ment’s efforts to colle ct data by other means, he may 
authorize the use of sampling if he thinks that is “feas i-
ble.”  The upshot for present purposes is that §195 does  
not require the “counterintuitive resul[t]” of barring the 
Secretary from including on the census questionnaire  the 
kinds of basic demographic questions that have been 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 11 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
asked as part of every census in U.  S. history.  RJR 
Nabisco, Inc. v. European Community, 579 U.  S. ___, ___ 
(2016) (slip op., at 15). 
D 
 One additional provision, 13 U. S. C. §6(c),9 requires 
close consideration.  This provision, which was enacted in 
1976 in the same Act as §§141(a)  and 195, has three sub-
sections.  Subsection (a) provides that the Secretary may 
call on other components of the Federal Government to 
obtain information that is “pertinent to” the Department’s 
work.  Subsection (b) authorizes the Secretary to “acquire , 
by purchase or otherwise” from state and local govern-
ments and private sources “such copies of records, reports, 
and other material as may be required for the efficient and 
economical conduct of the censuses and surveys provided 
for in this title.”  Finally, subsection (c) provides: 
“To the maximum extent possible and consistent with 
the kind, timeliness, quality and scope of the statistics 
required, the  Secretary shall acquire and use info r-
mation available from any source referred to in su b-
section (a) or (b) of this section instead of conducting 
—————— 
9 Section 6 states: 
 “(a) The Secretary, whenever he considers it advisable, may call upon 
any other department, agency, or establishment of the Federal Gov-
ernment, or of the government of the District of Columbia, for infor-
mation pertinent to the work provided for in this title. 
 “(b) The Secretary may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, from 
States, counties, cities, or other units of government, or their instr u-
mentalities, or  from private persons and agencies, such copies of 
records, reports, and other material as may be required for the efficient 
and economical conduct of the censuses and surveys provided for in this 
title. 
 “(c) To the maximum extent possible and consistent with the kind, 
timeliness, quality and scope of the statistics required, the  Secretary 
shall acquire and use information available from any source referred to 
in subsection (a) or (b) of this sec tion instead of conducting direct 
inquiries.” 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
12 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
direct inquiries.” 
 The District Court interpreted subsection (c) to mean 
that the Secretary must turn to another federal agency or 
outside source for demographic information  (rather than 
seeking the information on the census)  unless doing so 
would not be “possible” or “consistent with the kind, time-
liness, quality and scope of the statistics required.”  This 
argument fails for reasons similar to those that sank the 
§195 argument just discussed.  Section 6(c) is not a census- 
specific provision but instead applies gen erally to all the 
Commerce Department’s information -gathering activities.  
If it is read to apply to the “census of population,” it cannot 
be reconciled with §141(a), which, as noted, broadly au-
thorizes the Secretary to use that vehicle for obtaining 
information “relating to population,” i.e., core demographic 
information.  If §6(c)  applied to the gathering of such 
information, it would make it hard to justify the inclusion 
of any demographic questions on the census, even though 
this has been done since 1790.  (Is it not possible to get 
information about age and sex, for example, from any 
outside source (or combination of sources), even if the 
Department offers to acquire it from a private source by 
purchase?)  Reading §6(c) to mean what the District Court 
thought would turn it into the proverbial elephant stuffed 
into a mouse hole.  Section 6(c), however, is a decidedly 
mouse-like provision.  It was enacted with no fanfare and 
no real explanation, 10 and remained in the shadows, vir - 
—————— 
10 The most respondents can muster are snippets from the legislative 
history of the 1976 Census Act indicating that §6(c) was enacted to 
decrease the Secretary’s use of “direct inquiries” in the interest of 
“reducing respondent burden.”  H.  R. Rep. No. 94–1719, p. 10 (1976).  
Even accepting that premise, it simply raises the same question just 
discussed—namely, whether Congress’s desire to reduce respondent 
burden, as reflected by §6(c), yields to the Secretary’s  broad authoriza-
tion in §141(a) to “determine” the “form and content” of  any direct 
inquiries on the census.  Cf. id., at 11 (characterizing §141 as a “provi-
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 13 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
tually unused and unnoticed, for more than 40 years. 
E 
 Respondents and the Court cite two other provisions in 
support of reviewability, but neither has anything to do 
with the issue of putting a citizenship question on the 
census.  In determining whether statutory provisions 
include standards that could provide a basis for judicial 
review, it is necessary to focus on the precise claims at 
issue, see, e.g., Webster, 486 U. S., at 601–602 (distinguish-
ing between statutory and constitutional claims); Locom o-
tive Engineers, 482 U.  S., at 277– 279 (parsing claims 
under different prongs of reopener statute); Heckler , 470 
U. S., at 836 (rejecting as “irrelevant” to the agency dec i-
sion at issue two statutory provisions that were argued to 
provide “ ‘law to apply ’ ”).  And when viewed in this way, 
the remaining statutory provisions cited in support of 
reviewability are of no value. 
 Respondents point to §141(b), which requires the Secr e-
tary to complete the tabulation of total population by 
States “within 9 months after the census date” and then to 
report the results to the President.  That provision sets 
out an easily administered deadline, and it has nothing to 
do with the content of the census questionnaire. 
 Respondents also claim that §141(f) is relevant to the 
question of judicial review, but that provision concerns 
congressional review.  It directs the Secretary to report to 
Congress, at specified times , the subjects and questions 
that he intends to include on the census.  According to 
respondents, the Secretary’s compliance with those r e-
quirements is judicially reviewable, and that, they  
contend, takes the Secretary’s decision to include a citizen-
ship question out from under §701(a)(2). 
 Respondents fundamentally misunderstand the signifi - 
—————— 
sio[n] directly related to decennial . . . census”). 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
14 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
cance of congressional reporting requirements in evalua t-
ing whether a particular agency action is subject to jud i-
cial review.  Congressional reporting requirements are 
“legion in federal law,” Natural Resources Defense Council, 
Inc. v. Hodel, 865 F.  2d 288, 317 (CADC 1988), and their 
purpose is to permit Congress to monitor and, if it sees fit, 
to correct Executive Branch actions to which it objects.  
When a congressional reporting requirement “[l]ack[s] a 
provision for judicial review,” compliance “by its n ature 
seems singularly committed to congressional discretion in 
measuring the fidelity of the Executive Branch actor to 
legislatively mandated requirements.”  Id. , at 318.  In 
other words, it is Congress, not the J udiciary, that is best 
situated to  determine whether an agency’s responses to 
Congress are sufficient and, if not, to “take what it deems 
to be the appropriate action.”  Id., at 319. 
 In that respect, §141(f) actually cuts against judicial 
review.  The Constitution gives Congress the authority to 
“direct” the “Manner” in which the census is conducted, 
and by imposing the §141(f) reporting requirements, Co n-
gress retained some of that supervisory authority.  It did 
not transfer it to the courts.11 
 Respondents protest that congressional review  may not 
—————— 
11 It is notable that Congress, pursuant to its  supervisory authority, 
has in some cases limited the particular demographic characteristics 
about which the Secretary may require information through census 
questionnaires.  In §221(c), for example, Congress has dictated that “no 
person shall be compelled  to disclose information relative to his rel i-
gious beliefs or to membership in a religious body.”  Similarly, in a 
series of appropriation Acts, Congress has specified that “none of the 
funds provided in this or any other Act for any fiscal year may be use d 
for the collection of census data on race identification that does not 
include ‘some other rac e’ as a category.”  123 Stat. 3115, note following 
13 U. S. C. §5.  Those examples highlight that when Congress wishes to 
limit the Secretary’s authority to req uire responses to particular 
demographic questions, it “knows precisely how to do so.”  Limelight 
Networks, Inc. v. Akamai Technologies, Inc., 572 U. S. 915, 923 (2014). 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 15 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
be enough to guard against a Secretary’s abuses, especially 
when the party in control of Congress stands to benefit.  
But that complaint simply expresses disagreement with 
the Framers’ choice to vest power over the census in a 
political body, cf. Baldrige v. Shapiro, 455 U. S. 345, 347–
348 (1982) (“Under [the] Constitution, responsibility for 
conducting the decen nial census rests with Congress ”), 
and the manner in which Congress has chosen to exercise 
that power, see Wisconsin v. City of New York, 517 U. S. 1, 
19 (1996) (Congress has delegated its “virtually unlimited 
discretion” in conducting the census to the Secretary).   In 
any event, the ability to press constitutional challenges to 
the Secretary’s decisions, see n. 7, supra, answers many of 
the examples in respondents’ parade of horribles. 
 In short, the relevant text of §141(a) “fairly exudes 
deference” to the Secretary.  Webster, 486 U.  S., at 600.  
And no other provision of law cited by respondents or my 
colleagues provides any “meaningful judicial standard” for 
reviewing the Secretary’s selection of demographic que s-
tions for inclusion on the census.  Ibid. 
III 
 In addition to requiring an examination of the text and 
structure of the relevant statutes, our APA §701(a)(2) 
cases look to whether the agency action in question is a 
type that has traditionally been viewed as committed to 
agency discretion or whether it is instead one that “federal 
courts regularly review.”  Weyerhaeuser Co., 586 U.  S., at 
___ (slip op., at 12).  In cases where the Court has found 
that agency action is committed to agency discretion by 
law, an important factor has been the absence of an e stab-
lished record of judicial review prior to the adoption of the 
APA.  See Heckler, 470 U. S., at 832–833 (agency none n-
forcement); Locomotive Engineers, 482 U. S., at 282 (agency 
decision no t to reopen final decision based on material 
error); Lincoln, 508 U. S., at 192 (agency use of lump -sum 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
16 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
appropriations). 
 Here, there is no relevant record of judicial review.  We 
are confronted with a practice that reaches back two ce n-
turies.  The very first census went beyond a mere head 
count and gathered additional demographic information, 
and during virtually the entire period prior to the enac t-
ment of the APA, a citizenship question was asked of 
everyone.  Notably absent from that long record is any 
practice of judicial review of the conten t of the census.  
Indeed, this Court has never before encountered a direct 
challenge to a census question.  App. to Pet. for Cert. 416a.  
And litigation in the lower courts about the census is 
sparse and generally of relatively recent vintage. 
 Not only is  this sort of history significant in all 
§701(a)(2) cases, see Locomotive Engineers , supra, at 282,  
but we have previously stressed the particular “i m-
portance of historical practice” when it comes to evalua t-
ing the Secretary’s authority over the census.  Wisconsin, 
supra, at 21; see also ante, at 13 (opinion of the Court) .  
Moreover, where the relevant question is not whether 
review may be had at all, but rather the branch with the 
authority to exercise review, the absence of any substa n-
tial record of judic ial review is especially revealing.  See, 
e.g., NLRB v. Noel Canning, 573 U.  S. 513, 525 (2014) (it 
is “neither new nor controversial” that “longstanding 
practice of the government can inform our determination 
of what the law is” ( internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted)); United States v. Midwest Oil Co., 236 U. S. 459, 
473 (1915) (“in determining . . . the existence of a po wer, 
weight [is] given to .  . . usage”).  Thus, the absence of any 
real tradition of judicial review of decisions regarding the 
content of the census counsels against review in this case. 
 In an attempt to show that there is no relevant “trad i-
tion of nonreviewability,” Locomotive Engineers, supra, at 
282, respondents contend that this Court has recently 
engaged in review of the “conduct of the census,” Brie f for 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 17 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
Government Respondents 26–27.  But in none of the cases 
they cite did the Court address an APA challenge to the 
content of  census questions. 12  Some involved constitu - 
tional claims about enumeration and apportionment.  See 
Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505 U. S. 788, 790, 801 (1992) 
(constitutional challenge to “method used for counting 
federal employees serving overseas” as part of “reappor-
tionment determination”); Wiscon sin, 517 U.  S., at 20 
(constitutional challenge to Secretary’s decision not to 
adjust count).  Others concerned enforcement of statutes 
with specific directives.  See Department of Commerce, 525 
U. S., at 343 (holding that §195 bars use of “sampling” to 
reach actual enumeration for apportionment); Utah  v. 
Evans, 536 U. S. 452, 464– 465 (2002) (considering  
whether statistical method violated §195’s bar on use of 
“sampling” in apporti onment enumeration).  According  
to respondents, these cases mean that all  the Secretary’s 
census-related decisions are suitable for judicial review 
and thus fall outside of §701(a)(2), and the Court appar-
ently agrees, rejecting the Government’s §701(a)(2) arg u-
ment in part because “[w]e and other courts have ente r-
tained both constit utional and statutory challenges to 
census-related decisionmaking.”  Ante, at 15. 
 This argument misses the point of §701(a)(2).  The 
question under that provision is whether the challenged 
action “is committed to agency discretion by law,” not 
whether a d ifferent action by the same agency is review - 
able under the APA, much less whether an action taken by 
the same agency can be challenged under the Constit u-
tion.  Take the example of Heckler v. Chaney, supra, where 
the Court considered whether a particular Food and Drug 
—————— 
12 The same can be said for the lower court cases on which respon d-
ents rely.  See, e.g., Brief for Government Respondents  26, and n. 6 
(collecting cases, none of which “involved the census questionnaire” or 
the Secretary’s selection of questions). 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
18 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
Administration (FDA) decision was reviewable under the 
APA.  Many FDA actions are subject to APA review, see, 
e.g., Weinberger v. Hynson, Westcott & Dunning, Inc. , 412 
U. S. 609, 627 (1973), but that did not prevent the Heckler  
Court from holding that the particular FDA decision at 
issue there fell within §701(a)(2).   See also, e.g. , Heckler, 
supra, at 836–837. 
 Respondents and some of their amici  contend that the 
Secretary’s decision is at l east amenable to judicial review 
for consistency with the APA’s reasoned -explanation 
requirement.  See Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United 
States, Inc.  v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. , 463 
U. S. 29, 43 (1983)  (describing requirement).  Thus, the 
argument goes, even if no statute sets out a standard that 
can be used in reviewing the particular agency action in 
question, a court may review an agency’s explanation of 
the reasons for its action and set it aside if the court finds 
those reasons to be arbitrary or irrational. 
 This argument would obliterate §701(a)(2).  Even if a 
statute expressly gave an agency absolute, unrestricted, 
unfettered, unlimited, and unqualified discretion with 
respect to a particular decision, a court could still review 
the age ncy’s explanation of the reasons for its decision.  
That is not what §701(a)(2) means.  As we put it previously 
in answering a similar argument against application of 
§701(a)(2), it is “fals[e]” to suggest “that if the agency gives 
a ‘reviewable’ reason for otherwise unreviewable action, 
the action becomes reviewable.”  Locomotive Engineers, 
482 U.  S., at 283.  That is because when an action “is 
committed to agency discretion by law,” the J udiciary has 
no role to play, even when an agency sets forth “an em i-
nently ‘reviewable’ proposition.”  Id., at 282–283. 
IV 
 In sum, neither respondents nor my colleagues have 
been able to identify any relevant, judicially manageable 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
 Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2019) 19 
 
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
limits on the Secretary’s decision to put a core demographic 
question back on the census.  And without an “adequate 
standard of review for such agency action,” id., at 282, 
courts reviewing decisions about the “form and content” of 
the census would inevitably be drawn into second -
guessing the Secretary’s assessm ent of complicated policy 
tradeoffs,13 another indicator of “general unsuitability” for 
judicial review.  Heckler, supra, at 831. 
 Indeed, if this litigation is any indication, widespread 
judicial review of the Secretary’s conduct of the census will 
usher in an era of “disruptive practical consequences,” and 
this too weighs against review.  Sea board Allied Milling 
Corp., 442 U. S., at 457.  Cf. Tucker v. United States Dept. 
of Commerce, 958 F. 2d 1411, 1418 (CA7 1992) (expressing 
doubt about “both the provenance and the practicability ” 
of allowing judicial review of census-related decisions). 
 Respondents protest that the importance of  the census 
provides a compelling reason to allow APA review.  See 
also ante, at 22–23 (opinion of BREYER, J.).  But this ar-
gument overlooks the fact that the Secretary is account - 
able in other ways for census-related decisionmaking.14  If 
the Secretary vi olates the Constitution or any applicable  
statutory provision related to the census, his action is 
—————— 
13 In determining how the census is to be conducted, the Secretary 
must make decisions about  a bevy of matters, such as the best way to 
count particular persons or categories of persons with an adequate 
degree of accuracy ( e.g., by face -to-face interviews, telephone calls, 
questionnaires to be mailed back, contacts with neighbors, or use of 
existing records); the use of follow up procedures and other quality 
control measures; which persons should be included in which hous e-
holds; and issues concerning where a person should be enumerated.   
These and countless other factors may affect whether an indiv idual 
receives or responds to the census questionnaire. 
14 Since the time Secretary Ross publicly announced his intent to add 
the citizenship question, “Congress has questioned the Secretary about 
his decision in public hearings on several occasions.”  Brie f for Petition-
ers 50 (collecting examples). 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 
20 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE v. NEW YORK 
  
ALITO, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part 
reviewable.  The Secretary is also accountable to Congress 
with respect to the administration of the census since he 
has that power only because Congress has found it appr o-
priate to entrust it to him.  And the Secretary is always 
answerable to the President, who is, in turn, accountable 
to the people. 
*  *  * 
 Throughout our Nation’s history , the Executive Branch 
has decided without ju dicial supervision or interference 
whether and, if so, in what form the decennial census 
should inquire about the citizenship of the inhabitants of 
this country.  Whether to put a citizenship question on the 
2020 census questionnaire is a question that is committed 
by law to the discretion of the Secretary of Commerce and 
is therefore exempt from APA review.  The District Court 
had the authority to decide respondents’ constitutional 
claims, but the remainder of their complaint should have 
been dismissed. 
 I join Parts I, II,  III, IV–B, and IV–C15 of the opinion of 
the Court.  I do not join the remainder, and insofar as the 
Court holds that the  Secretary’s decision is review able 
under the APA, I respectfully dissent.   
—————— 
15 Although I would hold that the Secretary’s decision is not review - 
able under the APA, in the alternative I would conclude that the 
decision survives review under the applicable standards.  I join Parts 
IV–B and IV–C on that understanding. 
Opinion of ALITO, J. 
 