Hoctor v. United States Department of Agriculture — 82 F.3d 165 (7th Cir. 1996) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/716784.pdf

Patrick D. HOCTOR, Petitioner,
v.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, Respondent.
No. 95-2571.

United States Court of Appeals,
Seventh Circuit.
Argued Feb. 9, 1996.
Decided April 25, 1996.

166

William J. Tabor (argued), Terre Haute,
IN, for Patrick D. Hoctor.
Margaret M. Breinholt, M. Bradley Flynn
(argued), Dept, of Agriculture, Office of Gen.
Counsel, Washington, DC, for U.S. Dept, of
Agriculture.

Before POSNER, Chief Judge, and
DIANE P. WOOD and EVANS, Circuit
Judges.

POSNER, Chief Judge.
A rule promulgated by an agency that is
subject to the Administrative Procedure Act
is invalid unless the agency first issues a
public notice of proposed rulemaking, de-
scribing the substance of the proposed rule,
and gives the public an opportunity to submit
written comments; and ifafter receiving the
comments itdecides to promulgate the rule it
must set forth the basis and purpose of the
rule in a public statement. 5- U.S.C.
§§ 553(b), (c). These procedural require-
ments do not apply, however, to “interpreta-
tive rules, general statements of policy, or
rules of agency organization, procedure, or
practice.” 5 U.S.C. § 553(b)(A). Distin-
guishing between a “legislative” rule, to
which the notice and comment provisions of
the Act apply, and an interpretive rule, to
which these provisions do not apply, is often
very difficult— and often very important to
regulated firms, the public, and the agency.
Notice and comment rulemaking is time-con-
suming, facilitates the marshaling of opposi-
tion to a proposed rule, and may result in the
creation of a very long record that may in
turn provide a basis for a judicial challenge
to the rule if the agency decides to promul-
gate it. There are no formalities attendant
upon the promulgation of an interpretive
167
rule, but this is tolerable because such a rule
is “only” an interpretation. Every govern-
mental agency that enforces a less than crys-
talline statute must interpret the statute, and
it does the public a favor if it announces the
interpretation in advance of enforcement,
whether the announcement takes the form of
a rule or of a policy statement, which the
Administrative Procedure Act assimilates to
an interpretive rule. It would be no favor to
the public to discourage the announcement of
agencies’ interpretations by burdening the
interpretive process with cumbersome for-
malities.
The question presented by this appeal
from an order of the Department of Agricul-
ture is whether a rule for the secure contain-
ment of animals, a rule promulgated by the
Department under the AnimalWelfare Act, 7
U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., without compliance
with the notice and comment requirements of
the Administrative Procedure Act, is never-
theless valid because it ismerely an interpre-
tive rule. Enacted in 1966,the Animal Wel-
fare Act, as its title implies, is primarily
designed to assure the humane treatment of
animals. The Act requires the licensing of
dealers (with obvious exceptions, for example
retail pet stores) and exhibitors, and autho-
rizes the Department to impose sanctions on
licensees who violate either the statute itself
or the rules promulgated by the Department
under the authority of 7 U.S.C. § 2151,which
authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture “to
promulgate such rules, regulations, and or-
ders as he may deem necessary in order to
effectuate the purposes of [the Act].” The
Act provides guidance to the exercise of this
rulemaking authority by requiring the De-
partment to formulate standards “to govern
the humane handling, care, treatment, and
transportation of animals by dealers,” and
these standards must include minimum re-
quirements “for handling, housing, feeding,
watering, sanitation,” etc. 7 U.S.C.
§ 2143(a).
The Department has employed the notice
and comment procedure to promulgate a reg-
ulation, the validity of which is not ques-
tioned, that is entitled “structural strength”
and that provides that “the facility [housing
the animals] must be constructed of such

168
material and of such strength as appropriate
for the animals involved. The indoor and
outdoor housing facilities shall be structural-
ly sound and shall be maintained in good
repair to protect the animals from injury and
to contain the animals.” 9 C.F.R. § 3.125(a).
Enter the petitioner, Patrick Hoctor, who
in 1982began dealing in exotic animals on his
farm outside of Terre Haute. In a 25-acre
compound he raised a variety of animals
including “Big Cats”— a typical inventory in-
cluded three lions, two tigers, seven ligers (a
liger is a cross between a male lion and a
female tiger, and is thus to be distinguished
from a tigon), six cougars, and two snow
leopards. The animals were in pens (“pri-
mary enclosures” in the jargon of the admin-
istration of the Animal Welfare Act). The
area in which the pens were located was
surrounded by a fence (“containment fence”).
In addition, Hoctor erected a fence around
the entire compound (“perimeter fence”). At
the suggestion of a veterinarian employed by
the Agriculture Department who was as-
signed to inspect the facility when Hoctor
started his animal dealership in 1982, Hoctor
made the perimeter fence six feet high.
The following year the Department
issued an internal memorandum addressed
to its force of inspectors in which it said that
all “dangerous animals,” defined as includ­
ing, among members of the cat family, lions,
tigers, and leopards, must be inside a perim­
eter fence at least eight feet high. This pro­
vision is the so-called interpretive rule, inter­
preting the housing regulation quoted above.
An agency has, of course, the power, indeed
the inescapable duty, to interpret its own
legislative rules, such as the housing stan­
dard, just as it has the power and duty to
interpret a statute that it enforces. Stinson
v. United States, 508 U.S. 36, 42-46, 113
S.Ct. 1913, 1918-19, 123 L.Ed.2d 598 (1993).
On several occasions beginning in 1990,
Hoctor was cited by a Department of Agri-
culture inspector for violating 9 C.F.R.
§ 3.125(a),the housing standard, by failing to
have an eight-foot perimeter fence. Eventu-
ally the Department sanctioned Hoctor for
this and other alleged violations, and he has
sought judicial review limited, however, to
the perimeter fence. He is a small dealer
and it would cost him many thousands of
dollars to replace his six-foot-high fence with
an eight-foot-high fence. Indeed, we were
told at argument that pending the resolution
of his dispute over the fence he has discontin-
ued dealing in Big Cats. The parties agree
that unless the rule requiring a perimeter
fence at least eight feet high is a valid inter-
pretive rule, the sanction for violating it was
improper.
We may assume, though we need not
decide, that the Department of Agriculture
has the statutory authority to require dealers
in dangerous animals to enclose their com­
pounds with eight-foot-high fences. The
fence is a backup fail-safe device, since the
animals are kept in pens, cages, or other
enclosures within the compound, in an area
that is itself fenced, rather than being free to
roam throughout the compound. Since ani­
mals sometimes break out or are carelessly
let out of their pens, a fail-safe device seems
highly appropriate, to say the least. Two
lions once got out of their pen on Hoctor’s
property, and he had to shoot them. Yet,
when he did so, they were still within the
containment fence. The Department’s regu­
lations do not require a containment fence,
and it is unclear to us why, if that fence was
adequate — and we are given no reason to
suppose it was not— Hoctor should have had
to put up an additional fence, let alone one
eight-feet high. But we lay any doubts on
this score to one side. And we may also
assume that the containment of dangerous
animals is a proper concern of the Depart­
ment in the enforcement of the Animal Wel­
fare Act, even though the purpose of the Act
is to protect animals from people rather than
people from animals. Even Big Cats are not
safe outside their compounds, and with a
lawyer’s ingenuity the Department’s able
counsel reminded us at argument that if one
of those Cats mauled or threatened a human
being, the Cat might get into serious trouble
and thus it is necessary to protect human
beings from Big Cats in order to protect the
Cats from human beings, which is the impor­
tant thing under the Act. In fact Hoctor had
shot the two lions because they were danger­
ously close to one of his employees. Since
tort liability for injury caused by a wild

animal is strict, Burns v. Gleason, 819 F.2d
555 (5th Cir.1987); Behrens v. Bertram Mills
Circus Ltd., [1957]2 Q.B. 1; W. Page Keeton
et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of
Torts § 76, p. 542 (5th ed. 1984),the common
law, at least, is solicitous for the protection of
the citizens of Terre Haute against escapees
from Hoetor’s menagerie even if the Animal
Welfare Act is not. The internal memoran­
dum also justifies the eight-foot requirement
as a means of protecting the animals from
animal predators, though one might have
supposed the Big Cats able to protect them­
selves against the native Indiana fauna.
Another issue that we need not resolve
besides the issue of the statutory authority
for the challenged rule is whether the De-
partment might have cited Hoctor for having
a perimeter fence that was in fact, consider-
ing the number and type of his animals, the
topography of the compound, the design and
structure of the protective enclosures and the
containment fence, the proximity of highways
or inhabited areas, and the design of the
perimeter fence itself, too low to be safe, as
distinct from merely being lower than eight
feet. No regulation is targeted on the prob-
lem of containment other than 9 C.F.R.
§ 3.125, which seems to be concerned with
the strength of enclosures rather than their
height. But maybe there is some implicit
statutory duty of containment that Hoctor
might have been thought to have violated
even if there were no rule requiring an eight-
foot-high perimeter fence.
We need not decide. The only
ground on which the Department defends
sanctioning Hoctor for not having a high
enough fence is that requiring an eight-foot-­
high perimeter fence for dangerous animals
is an interpretation of the Department’s own
structural-strength regulation, and “provided
an agency’sinterpretation of its own regula-
tions does nOfNib'l^te the Constitution or a
federal statute, it must be given ‘controlling
weight unless it is plainly erroneous” or incon­
sistent with the regulation.’ Stinson v.
United States, supra, 508 U.S. at 44-46, 113
S.Ct. at 1919. The “provided” clause does
not announce a demanding standard of judi­
cial review, although the absence of any ref­
erence in the housing regulation to fences or
169
height must give us pause. The regulation
appears only to require that pens and other
animal housing be sturdy enough in design
and construction, and sufficiently well main-
tained, to prevent the animals from breaking
through the enclosure— not that any enclo-
sure, whether a pen or a perimeter fence, be
high enough to prevent the animals from
escaping by jumping over the enclosure.
The Department’s counsel made the wonder-
ful lawyer’sargument that the eight-foot rule
is consistent with the regulation because a
fence lower than eight feet has zero structur-
al strength between its height (here six feet)
and the eight-foot required minimum. The
two feet by which Hoctor’s fence fell short
could not have contained a groundhog, let
alone a liger, since it was empty space.
Our doubts about the scope of the
regulation that the eight-foot rule is said to
be “interpreting” might seem irrelevant,
since even if a rule requiring an eight-foot
perimeter fence could not be based on the
regulation, it could be based on the statute
itself, which in requiring the Department to
establish minimum standards for the housing
of animals presumably authorizes it to pro­
mulgate standards for secure containment.
But if the eight-foot rule were deemed one of
those minimum standards that the Depart­
ment is required by statute to create, itcould
not possibly be thought an interpretive rule.
For what would it be interpreting? When
Congress authorizes an agency to create
standards, itis delegating legislative authori­
ty, rather than itself setting forth a standard
which the agency might then particularize
through interpretation. Put differently,
when a statute does not impose a duty on the
persons subject to it but instead authorizes
(or requires — it makes no difference) an
agency to impose a duty, the formulation of
that duty becomes á legislative task entrust­
ed to the agency. Provided that a rule pro­
mulgated pursuant to such a delegation is
intended to bind, and not merely to be a
tentative statement of the agency’s view,
which would make it just a policy statement,
and not a rule at all, the rule would be the
clearest possible example of a legislative rule,
as to which the notice and comment proce­
dure not followed here is mandatory, as dis-

170
tinct from an interpretive rule; for there
would be nothing to interpret. American
Mining Congress v. Mine Safety & Health
Administration, 995 F.2d 1106,“ 1109
(D.C.Cir.1993); Robert A. Anthony, ‘Inter-
pretive’ Rules, ‘Legislative’Rules and ‘Spuri-
ous’Rules: Lifting the Smog,” 8 Admin. L.J.
of Am. Univ. 1 (1994). That is why the
Department must argue that its eight-foot
rule is an interpretation of the structural-
strength regulation-itself a standard, and
therefore interpretable, in order to avoid re-
versal.
Even if, despite the doubts that we
expressed earlier, the eight-foot rule is con­
sistent with, even in some sense authorized
by, the structural-strength regulation, it
would not necessarily follow that it is an
interpretive rule. It is that only if it can be
derived from the regulation by a process
reasonably described as interpretation. Met­
ropolitan School District v. Davila, 969 F.2d
485, 490 (7th Cir.1992). Supposing that the
regulation imposes a general duty of secure
containment, the question is, then, Can a
requirement that the duty be implemented
by erecting an eight-foot-high perimeter
fence be thought an interpretation of that
general duty?
“Interpretation” in the narrow sense
is the ascertainment of meaning. It is obvi­
ous that eight feet is not part of the meaning
of secure containment. But “interpretation”
is often used in a much broader sense. A
process of “interpretation” has transformed
the Constitution into a body of law undreamt
of by the framers. To skeptics the Miranda
rule is as remote from the text of the Fifth
Amendment as the eight-foot rule is from the
text of 9 C.F.R. § 3.125(a). But our task in
this case is not to plumb the mysteries of
legal theory; it is merely to give effect to a
distinction that the Administrative Procedure
Act makes, and we can do this by referring
to the purpose of the distinction. The pur­
pose is to separate the cases in which notice
and comment rulemaking is required from
the cases in which it is not required. As we
noted at the outset, unless a statute or regu­
lation is of crystalline transparency, the
agency enforcing itcannot avoid interpreting
it, and the agency would be stymied in its
enforcement duties if every time it brought a
case on a new theory it had to pause for a
bout, possibly lasting several years, of notice
and comment rulemaking. Besides being
unavoidably continuous, statutory interpreta-
tion normally proceeds without the aid of
elaborate factual inquiries. When it is an
executive or administrative agency that is
doing the interpreting it brings to the task a
greater knowledge of the regulated activity
than the judicial or legislative branches have,
and this knowledge is to some extent a sub-
stitute for formal fact-gathering.
At the other extreme from what might be
called normal or routine interpretation is the
making of reasonable but arbitrary (not in
the “arbitrary or capricious” sense) rules
that are consistent with the statute or regu-
lation under which the rules are promulgated
but not derived from it, because they repre-
sent an arbitrary choice among methods of
implementation. A rule that turns on a num-
ber is likely to be arbitrary in this sense.
There is no way to reason to an eight-foot
perimeter-fence rule as opposed to a seven-
and-a-half foot fence or a nine-foot fence or a
ten-foot fence. None of these candidates for
a rule is uniquely appropriate to, and in that
sense derivable from, the duty of secure con-
tainment. This point becomes even clearer if
we note that the eight-foot rule actually has
another component— the fence must be at
least three feet from any animal's pen. "Why
three feet? Why not four? Or two?
The reason courts refuse to create statutes
of limitations is precisely the difficulty of
reasoning to a number by the methods of
reasoning used by courts. Hemmings v. Bar­
ian, 822 F.2d 688, 689 (7th Cir.1987). One
cannot extract from the concept of a tort that
a tort suit should be barred unless brought
within one, or two, or three, or five years.
The choice is arbitrary and courts are un­
comfortable with making arbitrary choices.
They see this as a legislative function. Leg­
islators have the democratic legitimacy to
make choices among value judgments,
choices based on hunch or guesswork or even
the toss of a coin, and other arbitrary
choices. When agencies base rules on arbi­
trary choices they are legislating, and so
these rules are legislative or substantive and

require notice and comment rulemaking, a
procedure that is analogous to the procedure
employed by legislatures in making statutes.
The notice of proposed rulemaking corre-
sponds to the bill and the reception of writ-
ten comments to the hearing on the bill.
The common sense of requiring notice and
comment rulemaking for legislative rules is
well illustrated by the facts of this case.
There is no process of cloistered, appellate-
court type reasoning by which the Depart-
ment of Agriculture could have excogitated
the eight-foot rule from the structural-
strength regulation. The rule is arbitrary in
the sense that it could well be different with-
out significant impairment of any regulatory
purpose. But this does not make the rule a
matter of indifference to the people subject
to it. There are thousands of animal dealers,
and some unknown fraction of these face the
prospect of having to tear down their exist-
ing fences and build new, higher ones at
great cost. The concerns of these dealers
are legitimate and since, as we are stressing,
the rule could well be otherwise, the agency
was obliged to listen to them before settling
on a final rule and to provide some justifica-
tion for that rule, though not so tight or
logical a justification as a court would be
expected to offer for a new judge-made rule.
Notice and comment is the procedure by
which the persons affected by legislative
rules are enabled to communicate their con-
cerns in a comprehensive and systematic
fashion to the legislating agency. The De-
partment’s lawyer speculated that if the no-
tice and comment route had been followed in
this case the Department would have re-
ceived thousands of comments. The greater
the public interest in a rule, the greater
reason to allow the public to participate in its
formation.
We are not saying that an interpre­
tive rule can never have a numerical compo­
nent. See, e.g.,American Mining Congress
v. Mine Safety & Health Administration,
supra, 995 F.2d at 1108, 1113; St. Mary’s
Hospital v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield Ass’n.,
788 F.2d 888, 889-91 (2d Cir.1986). There is
merely an empirical relation between inter­
pretation and generality on the one hand,
and legislation and specificity on the other.
171
Especially in scientific and other technical
areas, where quantitative criteria are com-
mon, a rule that translates a general norm
into a number may be justifiable as interpre-
tation. The mine safety agency in the Amer-
ican Mining case could refer to established
medical criteria, expressed in terms of nu-
merical evaluations of x-rays, for diagnosing
black-lung disease. 995 F.2d at 1112-13.
Even in a nontechnical area the use of a
number as a rale of thumb to guide the
application of a general norm will often be
legitimately interpretive. Had the Depart-
ment of Agriculture said in the internal
memorandum that it couldnot imagine a case
in which a perimeter fence for dangerous
animals that was lower than eight feet would
provide secure containment, and would
therefore presume, subject to rebuttal, that a
lower fence was insecure, itwould have been
on stronger ground. For itwould have been
tying the rule to the animating standard, that
of secure containment, rather than making it
stand free of the standard, self-contained,
unbending, arbitrary. To switch metaphors,
the “flatter” a rule is, the harder it is to
conceive of it as merely spelling out what is
in some sense latent in a statute or regula-
tion, and the eight-foot rule in its present
form is as flat as they come. At argument
the Department’s lawyer tried to loosen up
the rale, implying that the Department might
have bent it ifHoetor proposed to dig a moat
or to electrify his six-foot fence. But an
agency’s lawyer is not authorized to amend
its rales in order to make them more palat-
able to the reviewing court.
The Department’s position might
seem further undermined by the fact that it
has used the notice and comment procedure
to promulgate rules prescribing perimeter
fences for dogs and monkeys. 9 C.F.R.
§§ 3.6(e)(2)(ii),3.77(f). Why itproceeded dif­
ferently for dangerous animals is unex­
plained. But we attach no weight to the
Department’s inconsistency, not only because
it would be unwise to penalize the Depart­
ment for having at least partially complied
with the requirements of the Administrative
Procedure Act, but also because there is
nothing in the Act to forbid an agency to use
the notice and comment procedure in cases in

which   it is not   required   to  do  so.    We   are
mindful   that   the  court   in  United    States  v.
Picciotto,  875   F.2d   345,  348   (D.C.Cir.1989),
thought    that  the   fact  that   an  agency    had
used   notice   and   comment     rulemaking     in  a
setting  similar   to  the  case  before   the   court
was   evidence   that  the   agency   “intended”    to
promulgate     a  legislative   rule  in  that   case,
only  without   bothering    with  notice   and  com-
ment.    The   inference   is strained,   and  in  any
event  we   think  the  agency’s   “intent,”  though
a frequently    cited  factor,  is  rather   a make-
weight.    What    the  agency   intends   is to  pro-
mulgate    a rule.    It is for  the  courts   to  say
whether    it is the   kind  of  rule  that  is  valid
only  if  promulgated      after  notice   and   com-
ment.    It  is that   kind  of  rule  if, as  in  the
present   ease,  it cannot   be   derived   by'inter-
pretation.    The  order   under   review,  based   as
it was   on  a rule  that  is  invalid  because    not
promulgated     in accordance    with   the required
procedure,   is therefore

  VACATED.









     Floyd   A.  BRANDT       and   Delores    D.
        Brandt,    Plaintiffs-Appellants,
                          v.
 VILLAGE        OF   CHEBANSE,         ILLINOIS,
              Defendant-Appellee.
                   No.   95-3093.

       United    States  Court   of  Appeals,
                 Seventh    Circuit.
             Argued     Feb.  20,  1996.
             Decided    April  26, 1996.