Weston v. Cassata — 37 P.3d 469 (Colo. App. 2001) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/2570444.pdf

Frances F. WESTON, Christine M. Kneu­
behl, and Shauna Parks, n/k/a Shauna
Disher, on behalf of themselves and al
others similarly situated, Plaintiffs-Ap­
pellees,

v.
Donald M. CASSATA, Director of th
Adams County Department of Social
Services, in his official capacity; and
Adams County Board of Social Services,
Defendants-Appellants.
No. 99CA2449.
Colorado Court of Appeals,
Div. I.
July 5, 2001.
Certiorari Denied Jan. 14, 2002.*
























*Justice COATS does not participate.
469


d
or















l




e

470

471

472






Davis, Graham & Stubbs, LLP, Thomas S.
Nichols, Hoffman Reilley Pozner & William-
son, L.L.P., Barbara Blumenthal, Faegre &
Benson, LLP, Steven D. Zansberg, Christo-
pher P. Beall, Denver, CO, Law Offices of
Kimberly E. Ghiselli, LLC, Kimberly E.
Lord, Boulder, CO, for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
James D. Robinson, Adams County Attor-
ney, Patricia A. Fredrick, Hal B. Warren,
Assistant County Attorneys, Brighton, CO,
for Defendants-Appellants.

Opinion by Judge DAVIDSON.
In this class action brought to determine
validity of sanction notices issued under
the
Colorado's program for Temporary Assis-
tance to Needy Families, defendants, Donald
M. Cassata, Director of the Adams County
Department of Social Services, and the
Adams County Board of Social Services, ap-
peal from the judgment in favor of plaintiffs,
Frances F. Weston, Christine M. Kneubehl,
and Shauna Disher, on behalf of themselves
and all others similarly situated. We affirm.
The Welfare Reform Act of 1996, also
known as the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA), 42 U.S.C. § 601, et seq.,
brought about extensive changes in welfare
law. Among other changes, it repealed the
Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC)program and instituted the Tempo-
rary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)
program. Unlike AFDC, which provided re-
cipients with benefits as long as they were
eligible,TANF limits welfare benefits to six-
ty months for eligible adult care-providers of
a family unit.
Funding for TANF assistance, like funding
for AFDC before it, comes partly from feder-
al monies disbursed to the states. Under
TANF, however, receipt of these federal
block grants is conditioned in part on the
states' enacting legislation limiting welfare
relief to recipients who comply with the more
rigorous requirements of the new welfare
system.
In 1997, in accordance with PRWORA,
Colorado enacted the Colorado Works Pro-
gram Act (CWPA), § 26-2-701, et seq.,
C.R.S$.2000. Under this program, partici-
pants receive funds "subject to available ap-
propriations" as long as they comply with
program requirements. Ree § 26-2-
709(1)(a), C.R.8.2000. Counties are required
to provide funds to eligible recipients as long
as funds are available. See ColoradoDepart-
ment of Human Services, Agency Letter
AFDC-97-12-A (July 3, 1997). The Colora-
do Department of Human Services (CDHS),
charged with responsibility for overseeing
administration of the CWPA, develops stan-
dardized forms for the counties to use in
streamlining their works program applica-
tions, services, and tracking of participants.
Section26-2-712(5)(a),C.R.8.2000.

Participants in the TANF program are
required to enter into an Individual Respon-
sibility Contract (IRC), which outlines the
program requirements. Section 26-2-708,
C.R.9$.2000.Individual counties will sanction
participants who fail to comply with TANF
IRC requirements, and that sanction is in the
form of a reduction of their cash assistance.
Section 26-2-711(2), C.R.S.2000. Before a
participant is sanctioned, however, the partic-
ipant must receive a sanction notice stating
the basis for the county's decision or action,
detailing the participant's rights to a county
conference under the dispute resolution pro-
cess and to a state-level appeal, and describ-
ing the process of such an appeal. Section
26-2-127(1)(a)(I), C.R.8.2000; CDHS Manual
§ 3.830,9 Code Colo.Regs. 2508-1.
All members of the plaintiff class are or
were recipients of welfare benefits in Adams
County under the revised welfare system
administered by defendants; all were sent
sanction notices by the Adams County De-
partment of Social Services. The individual
plaintiffs who received sanction notices were
given the right to dispute the sanction at a
local or state level. However, the various
sanction notices did not include full or accu-
rate information about the sanctions and the
appeal process. Testimony given at trial il-

lustrated that defendants pursued a policy of
consistently reinstating benefits to recipients
who disputed their sanctions, yet defendants
continued to use the defective notices.
Plaintiffs brought this class action to de-
termine whether the sanction notices were
insufficient. Specifically, pursuant to the
Uniform Declaratory Judgments Law, § 183-
51-101, et seq., C.R.9.2000, the Administra-
tive Procedure Act (APA), § 24-4-101, et
seq., C.R.8.2000,and 42 U.S.C. § 1983,plain-
tiffs sought a declaration that the sanction
notices were inadequate as a matter of law,
an injunction barring use of the inadequate
notices, reversal of the sanctions, and restitu-
tion of amounts withheld under the inade-
quate notice scheme. Plaintiffs also sought
attorney fees pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1988.
The named defendants in the original law-
suit included the Denver Department of So-
cial Services; Philip A. Hernandez, Manager
of the Denver Department of SocialServices;
the Colorado Department of Human Ser-
vices; Marva Livingston Hammons, Execu-
tive Director of the Colorado Department of
Human Services The Denver defendants
settled with plaintiffs prior to trial. The
State defendants are not party to this appeal.
After a bench trial, the court found in
favor of plaintiffs. Specifically, the court
found that none of the five versions of sanc-
tion notices sent by defendants to noncom-
plying participants between July 1997 and
November 1999 met statutory or regulatory
requirements. Moreover, the court found
that defendants failed to provide due process
to plaintiffs, in violation of both the state and
the federal constitutions.
Accordingly, the trial court declared all
notices provided to plaintiffs inadequate as a
matter of law, enjoined defendants from us-
ing such notices, ordered reversal and re-
moval of all records of previous sanctions
based on inadequate notices, and ordered
defendants equitably to restore the cash as-
sistance benefits improperly withheld from
plaintiffs under the inadequate notice
scheme.
I.

Defendants contend that the trial court
incorrectly refused to dismiss plaintiffs'
473

claims brought pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1988.
Specifically, they argue that the court erred
in determining that defendants' actions had
deprived plaintiffs of procedural due process.
We disagree.
To prevail on a § 1988 claim, plain­
tiffs must show that: (1) A person (2) acting
under color of state law (8) subjected plain­
plaintiffs subjected (4)
tiffs or caused to be to
the deprivation of a right secured by the
constitution or the laws of the United States.
County of Adams v. Hibbard, 918 P.2d 212,
217(Colo.1996).
We review matters of statutory con­
struction de novo. Canal Ins. Co. v. Nix, 7
P.3d 1088(Colo.App.1999).

A.

Initially, we address defendants' argument
that they are not "persons" and therefore
may not be sued under § 1988. We dis-
agree.

In an action for monetary damages
brought pursuant to § 1988, the states, state
officers acting in their official capacities, and
local entities considered "arms of the state"
are not "persons" and therefore are not sub­
ject to suit. See Will v. Michigan Dept of
State Police, 491 U.S. 58, 109S.Ct. 2304,105
L.Ed.2d 45 (1989); Simon v. State Comp.
Ins. Auth., 946 P.2d 1298 (Colo.1997). Thus,
county departments of social services and
their employees have been held not subject
to suit for damages under § 1988. See Wig-­
ger v. McKee, 809 P.2d 999 (Colo.App.1990).
In contrast, official-capacity actions
for prospective relief are not treated as ac­
tions against the state. See Willv. Michigan
Dep't of State Police, supra. Thus, in actions
for declaratory or injunctive relief, such as
here, government entities and their officers
are properly considered "persons" under
§ 1983 so long as they are responsible for
the implementation and enforcement of a
state statute. See Jackson v. State, 966 P.2d
1046(Colo.1998).

Here, the plain language of the Colo­
rado Human Services Code, § 26-1-101, et

474
seq., C.R.8.2000,and the CWPA, clearly de­
lineates responsibilities for both the state
and county agencies.
CDHS is responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the works program state-
wide, see §§ 26-1-111(2)(a),26-2-711(1),26-
2-712(5)(a), (e), 26-2-715(2)(8),
including, inter alia, prescribing such forms
as it may deem necessary, see § 26-1-
111(@)(e), C.R.S.2000, and developing stan-
dardized forms for the counties' use. See
§ 26-2-1712(5)(a). To facilitate the counties'
use of forms, the state maintains the Client
Oriented Information Network (COIN) data-
base, which contains a series of codes de-
scribing the activities giving rise to sanction
and is available for use by the counties in
preparing their sanction notices.
The county departments serve as agents of
CDHS and administer public assistance in
accordance with its rules and regulations.
See § 26-1-118(1), C.R.8.2000. Under state
regulations, the counties must give adequate
and timely notice of any action adversely
affecting a participant's welfare benefits.
See CDHS Manual §§ 3.830.2,3.880.21-.22,9
Code Colo. Regs. 2508-1. In doing so,
Adams County utilizes the sanction forms
developed by the state and uses the COIN
program in completing the sanction forms.
disagree with defendants that under
We
this scheme, and because of the oversight
role given to the state, they are not responsi-
ble for implementation and enforcement of
the statute. One of the expressly stated
purposes of the CWPAis to permit counties
to have "increased responsibility for the ad-
ministration of the works program." See
§ 26-2-705(2)(c), C.R.S.2000. The county's
role in administration of benefits and the
specific duties mandated by statute give the
county more than sufficientresponsibility to
be considered a "person" for the purposes of
suit under § 1983.
B.

Defendants' primary argument is that
plaintiffs were not deprived of due process
under the notice scheme.
Both the United States and Colorado
Constitutions prohibit the deprivation of
"property" without due process of law. U.S.
Const. amend XIV, § 1; Colo. Const. art.
II, § 25. The Fourteenth Amendment to the
United States Constitution does not create
property interests, but rather guarantees
procedural protections from infringement
upon or denial of substantive rights that
stem from an independent source, such as
federal or state law. See Board ofRegents v.
Roth, 408 U.S. 564,92 S.Ct. 2701,33 L.Ed.2d
548 (1972).
In analyzing due process issues,
courts must first determine whether the as­
serted property interest merits constitutional
protection, and then evaluate the adequacy of
the challenged process. See Watso v. Colo­
rado Dep't of Social Services, 841 P.2d 299
(Colo.1992).

1.
Defendants first assert that plaintiffs
have no property interest in welfare benefits.
We disagree.
of the 1996federal
Prior to the enactment
legislative changes in the welfare system,
welfare recipients had a statutory entitle-
ment to welfare benefits under the AFDC-
in essence, a property right subject to due
process protections. See Goldbergv. Kelly,
397 U.S. 254, 90 S.Ct. 1011,25 L.Ed.2d 287
(1970)(deseribing welfare benefits as "proper-
ty"). However, with the enactment of
PRWORA, Congress stated that there no
longer would be any individual entitlement to
welfare benefits. See 42 U.S.C. § 601(b). In
doing so, Congress intended to eliminate the
"entitlement mentality" behind the existing
welfare system by removing individual enti-
tlement to cash benefits and making welfare
benefits temporary and conditional. See
H.R.Rep. No. 104-651 (1996); Michelle L.
VanWiggeren, Experimenting with Block
Grants & Temporary Assistance The At-
tempt to Transform Welfare by Altering
Federal-State Relations & Recipients' Due
Process Rights, 46 Emory L.J. 1827 (1997).
PRWORA states, in pertinent part: "No
individual entitlement. This part ... shall
not be interpreted to entitle any individual or
family to assistance under any State program
funded under this part...." 42 U.S.C.

§ 601(b). Similarly, CWPA, the Colorado
statute implementing the federal statute,
states: "Nothing in this part 7 or in any
rules promulgated pursuant to this part 7
shall be interpreted to create a legal entitle-
ment in any participant to assistance provid-
ed pursuant to the works program." Section
26-2-704(1),C.R.S8.2000.
Its "no entitlement" language notwith-
standing, the state statutory scheme never-
theless contains mandatory language con-
cerning the payment of available funding to
eligible participants, see § 26-2-709(1)(a),
C.R.S.2000("Except as provided in this part
7 and subject to available appropriations, a
participant shall receive a basic assistance
grant...."); § 26-2-710(8), C.R.8.2000
("participant shall continue to receive the
basic cash assistance grant" during pendency
of an appeal), and the issuance of sanction
notices. See also CDHS Manual § 3.830, 9
Code Colo. Regs. 2508-1 (an applicant is
"entitled to receive prior written notice of
any agency action affecting his/her eligibility
for or receipt of benefits or service").
To have a property interest in a
government benefit, a person must have
more than a unilateral expectation-he or
she must have a "legitimate claim of entitle­
ment to it." Entitlements derive from "an
independent source such as state law-rules
or understandings that secure certain bene­
fits and that support claims of entitlement to
those benefits." Board of Regents v. Roth,
swpra, 408 U.S. at 577, 92 S.Ct. at 2709, 33
L.Ed.2d at 561.
In construing a statute, we must
read it in context and in a manner that gives
effect to the statute as a whole. See City of
Greenwood Village v. Petitioners for Pro­
posed City of Centermial, 3 P.8d 427 (Colo.
2000). We may not read the statute in a
manner that renders it unconstitutional. See
Buckley v. Chileutt, 968 P.2d 112 (Colo.1998).
Here, in a thorough and well-reasoned rul-
ing, the trial court rejected defendants' argu-
ment that the "no entitlement" language in
the statute precluded the creation of a prop-
erty interest in welfare benefits. We agree.
The court found defendants' interpretation
to be inconsistent with the mandatory nature
475
of the welfare program, and concluded that
the "no entitlement" language did not pertain
to entitlement at an individual level, but rath-
er to the notion that availability of block
grants to states was subject to the availabili-
ty of federal funds. Additionally, the trial
court noted that it would be constitutionally
impermissible to create property interests
that could be defeated simply by stating in
the statute that there was "no entitlement."
We do not dispute defendants' asser­
tion that courts should give effect to the
words contained in the statute according to
their plain and ordinary meaning. See
Farmers Group, Inc. v. Williams, 805 P.2d
419 (Colo.1991). Both the federal and state
statutes clearly state that there shall be "no
entitlement" to welfare benefits. Defendants
argue that the clear "no entitlement" lan­
guage should be read to negate any and all
property rights to welfare benefits Al­
though we agree that the "no entitlement"
language modifies the unconditional entitle­
ment to welfare benefits previously available
under the AFDC program, we do not agree
that it vitiates allforms of property rights in
welfare benefits.
Along the spectrum of property rights be-
tween absolute entitlement, such as that pre-
viously available under the AFDC program,
and no entitlement at all, such as that urged
by defendants' interpretation of the statute,
lies an area of property rights that, while not
absolute, invokes due process protection.
Accordingly, we explore the several notions
of entitlement underlying property rights in
welfare benefits.
On the "absolute" entitlement end of
the spectrum, there is the notion of a proper­
ty right that creates a right of action to sue
the state under certain "entitlement pro­
grams." See King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 809, 88
S.Ct. 2128, 20 LEd.2d 1118 (1968). Under
the AFDC program, individuals,by virtue of
having a property right in welfare benefits,
could sue the state to enforce their rights.
See Goldbergv. Kelly,supra.
In a related concept, the political and fiscal
notion of "entitlement" requires states, in
order to receive matching funds from the
federal government, to comply with federal

476
guidelines and then to provide the necessary
funding to all eligible participants.
Another, less absolute notion of property
rights relates to property allocated on the
basis of a regulatory scheme. Such a regula­
tory scheme, which contains discretion-con­
straining standards, invokes constitutional
due process protection. See Board of Re­
gentis v. Roth, supra; Washington Legal
Clinic for Homeless v. Barry, 107 F.3d 32
(D.C.Cir.1997)(property rights may arise
from administrative "rules or understand­
ings"); see also Mallette v.Arlington County
Employees' Supplemental Retirement Sys­
tem II, 91 F.3d 630 (4th Cir.1996); Griffeth
v. Detrich, 603 F.2d 118 (9th Cir.1979)(con­
struing mandatory statutory language to give
rise to an entitlement). See generally Cyn­
thia R. Farina, Welfare Reform Symposium
on Misusing "Revolution"& "Reform": Pro­
cedural Due Process & the New WelfareAct,
50 Admin. L.Rev. 591 (1998) (discussing the
foregoing notions of entitlement).
In Roth, the United States Supreme Court
tied the determination of this type of "prop-
erty interest" to the degree of discretion
vested in an official decisionmaker to with-
hold the benefit or impose the burden.
There, the Roth Court, referring to Goldberg
v. Kelly, supra, stated that the welfare recip-
ients' claims of entitlement were "grounded
in the statute defining eligibility for them."
Board of Regents v. Roth, supra, 408 U.S. at
5717,92 S.Ct. at 2709, 88 LEd.2d at 561.
Thus, ifthe statutory scheme comprehensive-
ly sets forth the conditions under which
claims of entitlement attach, and the individ-
ual recipient meets those conditions, the offi-
cial decisionmaker merely acts as a conduit
for distribution of welfare benefits. In such
a situation, the potential recipient's compli-
ance with the statutory standards, rather
than the decision of an official, gives rise to
the welfare benefit.
In Washington Legal Clinic for Homeless
v. Barry, supra, the federal cireuit court
reconfirmed that the less discretion the state
official has to determine a benefit, the more
likely the benefit is a "property right."
Based on that reasoning, the court deter-
mined that, because discretion for allocation
of available shelter was in the hands of ad-
ministrators, the emergency shelter program
in question did not create an entitlement.
In a similar vein, a property right
also may depend on whether, absent the
alleged denial of due process, there is either
a certainty or a very strong likelihood that an
application would have been granted. See
Yale Auto Parts, Inc. v. Johnson, 758 F.2d
54 (2d Cir.1985)(examining entitlement in the
context of petitioner's likelihood of obtaining
a certificate of location approval).
government enacted the
When the federal
1996 welfare reform laws, its purposeful in­
clusion of "no entitlement" in the plain lan­
guage of the statute indicated an intent to
dispose of an individual's absolute entitle­
ment to welfare benefits. However, because
we must interpret a statute in its entirety,
see City of GreenwoodVillage v. Petitioners
for Proposed City of Centennial, supra, we
may not, as defendants urge, end our analy­
sis with that single phrase. Despite the
forcefulness and apparent specificity of the
"no entitlement" language, the construction
of the remainder of the welfare statutory
scheme illustrates that the federal govern­
ment did not, and constitutionally could not,
eliminate all forms of entitlement to welfare
benefits.
The current structure of the block grant
program provides, in essence, that the feder-
al government may or may not disburse
funds to states for welfare purposes, depend-
ing on whether funds are available. If funds
are available, the federal government may
further condition disbursement of funds on
whether states have complied with the condi-
tions set forth in federal welfare legislation.
The government is not obligated to allocate
funds to the states and has a wide degree of
discretion in deciding whether to allocate
funds.
At that stage of the process, a participant's
right to welfare benefits has not yet matured
into a personal "entitlement." The federal
government may decide not to make funding
available to the states for welfare programs,
and may withhold funding from states that
fail to follow federal standards. In either of
these situations, individuals expecting wel-
fare benefits cannot sue the states for bene-

fits not given. However, once a state, having
enacted the legislation required by federal
statute, receives a federal block grant for the
express purpose of distribution as welfare
benefits, welfare recipients will receive the
money if they comply with the statutory
standards.
Here, the record indicates that both state
and county officials conceded that partici-
pants in the program have the right to re-
ceive cash assistance benefits ifsuch benefits
are available and that, if participants are
eligible, the county must make such pay-
ments.
Accordingly, we conclude that,
once welfare recipients have complied
with
statutory standards and have begun receiv­
ing welfare benefits, the right to welfare
benefits is a property right that cannot be
compromised without procedural due process
protections. If money has been allocated by
the federal government to the state, and ifa
participant meets the criteria set forth by
statute, defendants have no discretion to de­
termine whether that participant should re­
ceivewelfare benefits. See Board of Regents
v. Roth, supra. Despite the state officials'
active role in distributing welfare monies,
that role has no discretionary component be­
yond the authority to withhold or distribute
benefits according to statute.

Thus, the due process right under
the new scheme is not "the guarantee of
getting the benefit," but rather the guaran­
tee that, if and when the benefit is granted,
the "government will employ a decisionmak-­
ing protocol reasonably likely to yield correct
application of the legally relevant substantive
criteria to the individual case." Farina, su­
pra, 50 Admin. L.Rev. at 622. Although the
government has unambiguously expressed an
intent to do away with the absolute entitle­
ment to welfare benefits previously available
under the AFDC program, it did not intend
to eliminate welfare benefits altogether, but
merely to create a more conditional property
right in the receipt of federal benefits and to
make the requirements of attaining a proper­
ty right in those benefits more rigorous.
Furthermore, the General Assembly
may not constitutionally authorize the depri­
477
vation of a property interest, onee conferred,
without appropriate procedural safeguards.
See ClevelandBoard ofEducation v.Louder-­
mill, 470 U.S. 582,105S.Ct. 1487,84L.Ed.2d
494 (1985), Washington Legal Clinic for
Homeless v. Barry, supra, 107 F.3d at 38
(expressing doubt that "blanket 'no-entitle­
ment' disclaimers can by themselves strip
entitiements from individuals in the face of
statutes or regulations unequivocally confer­
ring them"). Consistent with that principle,
federal regulations stillrequire that hearings
at the state agency level "shall meet the due
process standards set forth in the U.S. Su­
preme Court decision in Goldbergv. Kelly."
45 C.E.R. § 205.10(a)(1)(ii)(2001).

Accordingly, we conclude that because
plaintiffs had a property right, albeit not an
unlimited one, in continued receipt of welfare
benefits, plaintiffs were constitutionally enti-
tled to procedural due process.

2.

Defendants also argue that, because
under Goldberg v. Kelly, supra, a pretermin-­
ation notice merely need provide timely and
adequate notice detailing the reasons for a
proposed termination, the Adams County no­
tices were more than adequate. We dis­
agree.

If an administrative regulation
sets forth the minimum standards for notice
requirements, those standards serve as the
minimum notice required for due process.
See Dep't of Health v. Donahue, 690 P.2d 243
(Colo.1984). A notice of adverse action that
fails to comply substantially with federal and
state requirements cannot provide the basis
for a deprivation of benefits. See Weaver v.
Colorado Dep't of Social Services, TOLP.2d
1280 (Colo.App.1990).

According to the state regulation, neces-
sary components of an adequate notice re-
quire that:
A. The notice must be in writing; and,
B. It must describe clearly in terms that
are understandable to the applicant or re-
cipient the action to be taken and the
reason(s) for the action; and,

478
C. -Itmust refer specifically by number to
the section(s) of the State Department's
rules and/or in the Colorado Works Pro-
gram, the county's officialwritten policy(s)
that require or permit the action be taken,
or cite the specific changes in federal or
state law requiring the action; and,
D. It must state the effective date of the
proposed action; and,
E. It must explain the individual's right
to request a local level dispute resolution
conference and state level fair hearing, the
time period for requesting a.conference or
hearing, and the steps which must be tak-
en to obtain a conference or hearing; and,
-Itmust explain the recipient's right to
F.
continued benefits and the obligation to
repay if it is determined that the recipient
was not entitled to receive them; and,
G. It must inform the individual of his/
her right to be represented or assisted by
legal counsel, a relative, a friend or a
spokesperson of his/her choosing.
H. To the extent practicable, notice shall
be in his/her primary language. If s/he is
illiterate, the action shall also be explained
verbally.
CDHS Manual § 3.830.21, 9 Code Colo.
Regs. 2508-1.
The trial court found all Adams County
notices to be inadequate under this regula-
tion. The court made particularized findings
as to the respective shortcomings of five
different phases of sanction notices issued
between July 1997and November 1999.
Phase I notices failed to state the actual
amount of the sanction, failed to describe the
of the sanction on future benefit levels,
effect
failed to provide a sufficientlyspecificreason
for the sanction, failed to provide a citation to
the enabling regulation, and incorrectly stat-
ed that the participant had only twenty-six,
instead of ninety, days to appeal. Phase IL
notices contained all the same errors as
Phase I notices and also failed to provide the
effective date for the rollover of the sanction.
Phase III notices contained all the same
errors as Phase II notices, with the exeeption
of the incorrect statement that the partici-
pant had only twenty-six days to appeal.
Phase IV notices failed to state the amount
or effect of the sanction, to provide a suffi-
ciently specific reason for the sanction, and
to provide an effective date for the rollover of
the sanction. Finally, Phase V notices con-
tained the same deficiencies as Phase IV
notices, with the exception of the failure to
provide an effective date for the rollover.
In summary, the trial court found that all
the sanction notices failed to state the
amount of the sanction and a sufficiently
specific reason for the action taken. Specifi-
cally, the court held inadequate as a matter
of law the sanction notices stating the appeal
period to be twenty-six days, rather than
ninety days. Generally, the court found that
defendants failed to comply with CDHS reg-
ulations.
The record demonstrates that the notices
contained the patent deficiencies noted by
the trial court. Accordingly, we conclude
that the legal insufficiency of the notices
deprived plaintiffs of due process of law.

II.
Defendants also contend that, be­
cause plaintiffs failed to pursue or exhaust all
available administrative remedies, the trial
court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over
plaintiffs' state claims under the Colorado
APA and the declaratory judgments law.
We disagree.
Exhaustion of administrative
remedies is not required when it is "clear
beyond a reasonable doubt" that further ad­
ministrative review by the agency would be
futile because the ageney will not provide the
relief requested. See State v. Golden's Con­
crete Co., 962 P.2d 919 (Colo.1998). Also,
when a practice is aimed at avoiding the
possibility of judicial review, there is no re­
quirement of exhaustion. See Ellis v. Blum,
643F.2d 68(2dCir.1981).
We note that the administrative law sys-
is geared toward individuals and autho-
tem
rized to hear and resolve individual appeals.
See CDHS Manual § 3.850.1, 9 Code Colo.
Regs. 2508-1.
In denying defendants' motion, the court
stated that, because defendants maintained a
practice of reinstating welfare benefits to

those sanctioned recipients who appealed, the
possibility of judicial review on the issue of
adequacy of notice never materialized.
The record supports the court's finding
that individuals who appealed a sanction re-
ceivedreinstatement of welfare benefits. Al-
though individualplaintiffs had a process by
which to contest their personal sanction in a
particular situation, we agree with the trial
court that defendants' practice of uniformly
reinstating welfare benefits foreclosed indi-
vidual plaintiffs from the opportunity to con-
test the inadequacy of sanction notices in
general.
Furthermore, the record illustrates that
defendants consistently refused to modify the
insufficient sanction notices, even in the face
of administrative decisions that the notices
were inadequate. Defendants insisted that
the insufficiency of notices was the state's,
not the county's, concern.

By bringing this class action, plaintiffs
sought to remedy not their own personal
deprivation of benefits, but the inadequacy of
the notice system in general. The inadequa-
cy of the sanction notices presented a con-
cern distinct from those of individual claim-
ants, and thus an issue broader in seope than
the questions the administrative review pro-
cess is permitted to address. See CDHS
Manual § 8.850.1, 9 Code Colo. Regs. 2508.1.
Although the administrative framework pro-
vides relief for individuals, we agree with the
trial court that such remedies could not pro-
vide the sort of classwide relief sought by
plaintiffs in this case.

The judgment is affirmed.

Judge METZGER and Judge ROYconcur.
479


In re the CUSTODY OF C.J.S., a Child,

and Concerning S.E.S. and L.J.S., minor
child's maternal Grandparents,
Petitioners-Appellants,
and N.K.S., minor child's natural Mother,
Respondent-Appellee.

No. 00CA1048.
Colorado Court of Appeals,
Div. II.

July 19, 2001.
Rehearing Denied Sept. 13, 2001.
Certiorari Denied Jan. 14, 2002.