National Maritime Union of America v. Commander, Military Sealift Command — 824 F.2d 1228 (D.C. Cir. 1987) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/492027.pdf

1228
SAR-II PRA regardless of its proprietary
status. Id. at 42. Appellee maintains that
the NRC steadfastly avoided confronting
the strong criticism by UCS and its own
advisory panel, the ACRS, until it was
forced to do so by this litigation. Id.
We find that the District Court wrote
convincingly, but in insufficient detail, as
to the public interest served by this litiga-
tion. Specifically, this Court is troubled by
the seemingly inconsistent language as to
the reasonableness of the NRC’swithhold-
ing of the PRA in the District Court’s
Memorandum of June 6, 1985and its Mem-
orandum Opinionof October 22,1985. The
District Court should, on remand, provide a
fuller explanation or further findings as-
sessing the unreasonableness of NRC’s
withholding.

Ill
Because the record demonstrates
some support for a finding of eligibility and
entitlement, a reversal without a remand
would be improper. It is the rule of this
Circuit that if there is some ambiguity or
lack of discussion in the trial court’s opin­
ion, it is appropriate to remand to that
court for further findings of fact. See,
e.g., Cox, 601 F.2d at 6; Constitutional
Government, 656 F.2d at 871; Nationwide
Building Maintenance, 559 F.2d at 710.
For the foregoing reasons, we remand
the grant of attorney’s fees to the District
Court for further explanation or further
findings of fact explaining the inconsisten-
cies in its Memorandum and Memorandum
Opinionboth as to the prematurity of filing
suit and the reasonableness of the NRC in
withholding information later released by
GE in settlement.
It is so ordered.
NATIONAL MARITIME UNION OF
AMERICA, AFL-CIO, et al.,
Appellants,
v.
COMMANDER, MILITARY SEALIFT
COMMAND, et al.
No. 86-5210.

United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.
Argued Dec. 11, 1986.
Decided July 31, 1987.

                                            1229

   Joseph   E. Kolick,  Jr., with  whom    Angelo
V. Arcadipane,    Clay  Warner,    James   H. Hel-
ler, Jennifer   R.   Levin,  Washington,     D.C.,
and  Ned   R.  Phillips, New    York   City, were
on  joint  brief, for  appellants.
   Charles   F. Flynn,   Asst.  U.S.  Atty.,  with
whom     Joseph    E.   diGenova,    U.S.   Atty.,
Royce   C. Lamberth,    R. Craig   Lawrence    and
Michael   J. Ryan,   Asst.   U.S.  Attys.,  Wash-
ington,  D.C.,  were   on brief,  for the  federal
appellee.
   Coleman    S.  Hicks,   Newman     T.  Halvor-
son, Jr. and  Timothy    J.O’Rourke,Washing-
ton, D.C.,  were   on brief,  for appellee,  Lavi-
no  Shipping    Co.
   Richard   Gabriele,  New   York   City, was  on
brief, for appellee,  Seafarers    Intern. Union.
James   M.  Altman,   New    York   City, entered
an  appearance    for  appellee.
  Joseph    Dinsmore     Murphy,    Washington,
D.C.,  was  on  brief, for  appellee,  District  2,
Marine   Engineers     Beneficial   Assn—   AMO,
AFL-CIO.

  Before    BORK,     STARR      and   D.H.
GINSBURG,       Circuit  Judges.

  Opinion    for  the   Court   filed  by
Circuit  Judge   BORK.

  BORK,     Circuit  Judge:
  Appellants,    three  labor   unions,  brought
suit in district court  to obtain   a declaration
that a government     contract   awarded   by  the
Military  Sealift  Command      to  Lavino   Ship-
ping  Company     was   void  and  to  enjoin  the
contract’s  performance.      The  district  court
dismissed   the  suit, holding   that  appellants
lacked  standing.     We   agree   with   the  dis-
trict court  that appellants   lack  standing   to
pursue   their  claim  under   the  Service  Con-
tract Act.   Without   deciding  whether    appel-
lants  have  standing    to pursue    their other
claims, we   hold  for appellees   on the  merits
of those   claims.

1230
I.
A.
In 1984, the Military Sealift Command
(“MSC”),a unit of the Department of the
Navy, was operating twelve government-
owned oceanographic ships with civil ser-
vice mariners of both “permanent” and
“temporary” tenure. Many of these sea-
men were represented by appellant unions.
Pursuant to regulations implementing Of-
fice of Management and Budget (“OMB”)
Circular A-76, which provides a framework
of policies and procedures to facilitate the
performance of governmental activities by
private firms, the MSC undertook to com-
pare the cost of contracting with a private
firm to operate the ships and the cost of its
own continued operation of the ships. It
issued a solicitation requesting bids from
private firms to operate the ships and in
the meantime prepared its own estimate of
the cost of continued government opera-
tion. This solicitation did not require the
winning bidder to pay specified minimum
wages and fringe benefits or otherwise to
comply with the Service Contract Act (the
“Act”), 41 U.S.C. §§ 351-358 (1982).
Upon analysis of the bids from private
firms, the MSC found that three bids, in-
cluding those of appellee Lavino and of
Marine Transport Lines, Inc. (“Marine
Transport”), were competitive. Upon re-
ceipt of best and final offers from these
three bidders, and upon comparison with
the cost estimate for continued government
operation, the MSCtentatively awarded the
contract to Marine Transport. All persons
directly affected by this action, including
all civil service mariners and their labor
representatives, were notified and given an
opportunity to appeal certain issues admin-
istratively to the office of the Chief of
Naval Operations. All appeals taken were
denied.
But as a result of a conclusion by the
government that the Act did apply to this
solicitation and contract award, the MSC
rescinded the tentative award, advised the
three competitive bidders of the Act’sappli-

1. In the original round of offers,Marine Trans-
port bid $79,576,560, Lavino $81,333,912, and
the government $115,107,309. On the solicita-
cability, requested new best and final of­
fers from the bidders and a new cost esti­
mate from the government and announced
that a future amended solicitation would
contain mandatory wage levels determined
by the Labor Department in accord with
the Act. In response, Marine Transport
brought suit, contending that the Act did
not apply to the procurement. The district
court granted summary judgment to the
government, holding that the decision to
call for new bids was proper and that the
Act did apply to the procurement insofar as
the ships would operate within American
territorial waters. Marine Transp. Lines,
Inc. v. Lehman, 623 F.Supp. 330 (D.D.C.­
1985).
The solicitation as ultimately amended
required the winning bidder to agree to
pay, retroactively to the date of the award,
wage rates and benefits to be specified by
the Labor Department. The solicitation at
no point provided any schedule specifying
these wages and benefits because the La-
bor Department, without a data base for
these positions, could not prepare a timely
schedule.
Of the new best and final offers reflec-
tive of this and other amendments to the
solicitation, Lavino’soffer now was lowest,
and it was awarded the contract.1 The
MSC also then announced that the govern-
ment would not grant an administrative
appeal from this award, since it found that
all issues appealable administratively could
and should have been raised in the appeal
from the first tentative award to Marine
Transport.

Both the government’s request for bids
and the ultimate contract awarded to Lavi-
no required the winning bidder to grant
government employees displaced by the
contract’s performance a right of first re-
fusal to any job openings under the con-
tract. The MSC determined that displaced
permanent civil service mariners would
find it unusually difficult to obtain posi-
tions elsewhere in government or in the

tion as ultimately amended, Lavino bid $79,-
750,778, Marine Transport $81,720,435, and the
government $114,798,090.

private sector. Therefore, to avoid burden-
ing the permanent mariners with additional
competitors for job openings under the con-
tract, the MSC decided that the contract
award’s condition didnot require a grant of
the first-refusal right to displaced tempo-
rary civil service employees.

B.
The National Maritime Union of Amer-
ica, AFL-CIO, and two other unions (here
referred to collectively as “the Unions”)
represent civil service mariners as well as
employees of Marine Transport;2 none of
the appellant unions represent employees
of Lavino.3 The Unions filed suit in the
district court, asking the court to enjoin
performance of the contract and to require
MSC to vacate the award to Lavino and
resolicit the contract upon receipt of a
wage determination. In the alternative,
the Unions asked the court to require the
MSCto grant the Unions an administrative
appeal from the Lavino award and to re-
quire Lavino to grant first-refusal rights to
displaced temporary civil service mariners.
To support their claims for relief, the Un-
ions asserted that the Lavino award was
illegal under the Act because neither the
solicitation nor the contract contained a
wage determination, and that MSC’srefus-
al to permit an appeal from the award and
its decision on the first-refusal point con-
travened provisions of OMB Circular A-76
and its implementing regulations.
2. Appellant National Maritime Union represents
unlicensed seamen on 9 of the 12 ships in-
volved; appellant District No. 1— Pacific Coast
District, Marine Engineers’ Beneficial Associa-
tion represents licensed engineering officers on
all 12 ships; appellant District No. 3— Radio
Officers Union, Marine Engineers’Beneficial As-
sociation represents radio officers on all 12
ships.

3. Two labor unionsAppelleealsointervenedinbehalf of
defendants.Officers, DistrictEngineers’No.2—Americ
Maritime AMO,MarineAFL-CIO representsBeneficial
Associationofficers,— all
censed including radio officers, who
operate the oceanographic ships for Lavino.
Appellee Seamens International Union of North
America, Atlantic, Gulf, Lakes and Inland Wa-
ters District,AFL-CIO represents unlicensed civ-
il service mariners on the three ships where
NMU isnot the representative, as well as unli-
1231
On cross-motions for summary judg­
ment, the district court dismissed the Un­
ions’suit for want of standing. National
Maritime Union v. Commander, Military
Sealift Command, 632 F.Supp. 409 (D.D.C.­
1986). The court held that the Unions were
not within the zone of interests of the Act,
since they did not represent employees of
the winning bidder, whom the Act protects.
Id. at 413-15. The court further held that
since Circular A-76 merely represents a
managerial tool that does not give rise to
any protected private interest, the Unions
did not have standing to bring any claim
based on the Circular. Id. at 416, 417.
This appeal followed.
II.

The Unions allege injury to their
members, in whose behalf they sue as repr­
esentatives.4 To attain representative
standing, the Unions must show that: their
members individually would have standing
to bring the same claims; the interests the
Unions protect by bringing the claims are
germane to the Unions’purposes; and nei­
ther the claim nor the relief sought re­
quires individual members to participate in
the litigation. See Hunt v. Washington
State Apple Advertising Comm’n, 432
U.S. 333, 343, 97 S.Ct. 2434, 2441, 53
L.Ed.2d 383 (1977). The first point, which
requires an analysis of the standing of an
individual union member, is discussed in
detail below.5 We here address the conten-
censed seamen employed by unsuccessful bid-
ders for the challenged contract, and is seeking
to represent unlicensed seamen employed by
Lavino.

4. The Unions also argue that they have standing
to sue in their own behalf as potential bargain-
ing representatives of employees of Lavino who
are not presently represented by a union. But
the remedy the Unions seek— the voiding of the
award to Lavino— runs precisely contrary to the
an interest the Unions might claim injury to, i.e.,
li- their ability to organize or collect dues from
Lavino employees. The Unions’ only serious
claim to standing is in their representative ca-
pacity.

5. The second requirement, germaneness, is
clearly met. The Unions’purposes unquestiona-
bly include maximizing their members’ employ-
ment. Overturning the contract award to Lavi-

1232

tion that the Unions lack standing because
the employees they represent have conflict-
ing interests in the outcome of this litiga-
tion. That contention may be seen as an
attempt to add a fourth factor to those
specified by Hunt or as an aspect of the
third. It is unnecessary to decide the prop-
er category for present purposes. We con-
clude that whatever conflict there may be
among the Unions’ members in this case
does not deprive the Unions of association-
al standing.
Most of the instances of contra­
dictory interests among the Unions’ mem­
bers urged upon us may not truly present a
contradiction, but we will not take the time
to analyze these instances because there is
one example that clearly presents a con­
flict. This is the Unions’ request that the
court require Lavino to grant first refusal
rights to their displaced temporary civil
servant members. The very reason given
by MSC for denying the right to temporary
mariners is that their exercise of the right
could aggravate unemployment among per­
manent mariners, who of course are also
represented by the Unions. We therefore

no would make itpossible for either civil ser-
vice mariners to retain employment or prospec-
tive Marine Transport employees to obtain em-
ployment and would further this purpose.

6. The Unions argue that two decisions of this
court support their contention that any conflict
in the interests of their members is irrelevant.
International Ass’n of Machinists v. Hodgson,
515 F.2d 373 (D.C.Cir.1975); Kentron Hawaii,
Ltd. v. Warner, 480 F.2d 1166 (D.C.Cir.1973).
But neither decision discussed the problem of
conflicting member interests.
Their precedential value on this question of
standing thus is minimal. See Pennhurst State
School & Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 119,
104 S.Ct. 900, 918, 79 L.Ed.2d 67 (1984). More­
over, it appears that in both Hodgson and Ken-­
tron the problem of conflicting interests did not
exist because it was the same union members
who were first employed by the displaced bid­
der and then retained by the successful bidder.
SeeHodgson, 515 F.2d at 377 (same members of

same union now paid less for same jobs); Ken­
tron, 480 F.2d at 1169.
The Supreme Court’s statement in
7.Seldin, 490, 511, 2197,Warth2211,v.
422 U.S.(1975), that,95 S.Ct. 45
L.Ed.2d 343 to obtain members,stand
"[t]he association must allege that its
or any one of them" is injured is sometimes
must decide whether the contrary interests
of the temporary and permanent mariners,
both of whom the Unions represent, oper-
ate to deny the Unions representative
standing.6
The lower courts disagree on the point.
Compare Gillis v. United States Dep’t
of
Health & Human Services, 759 F.2d 565,
572-73 (6th Cir.1985) (upholding associa-
tion’s standing despite alleged harm to
some members from victory in litigation)
with Associated Gen. Contractors v. Otter
Tail Power Co., 611 F.2d 684, 691 (8th
Cir.1979) (rejecting associational standing
due to “actual and potential conflicts”
among members’ interests in the litigation).
We conclude for a number of reasons that
associational standing does not necessarily
depend upon harmony of member interests.
The first of these reasons is the very good
one that we think the Supreme Court has
decided the question.7
The Court, in UAW v. Brock, 477 U.S.
274, 106 S.Ct. 2523, 91 L.Ed.2d 228 (1986),
arguably suggested that conflicting inter-
ests of members did not preclude associa-

cited as relevant to the problem of conflicts. It
seems more likely that the Court was merely
stressing that an association cannot have stand-
ing if noneMcRae,ofitsmembers297,would have standing.2671,
Harris v. (1980),448U.S. 100S.Ct. 65
L.Ed.2d 784 also seems inapposite. The
Court found that a women’s association lacked
standing to challenge the Hyde Amendment’s
limits on Medicaid funding for abortions on the
theory that the amendment interfered with the
free exercise of religion guaranteed by the first
amendment. The association conceded a diver-
sity of views about abortion among its members
and the Court said "the participation of individ-
ual members ... is essential to a proper under-
standing and resolution321,of their free exercise
claims.” Id. at 100 S.Ct. at 2690. The
Court had just quoted203,Abington223,School1560,Dist.1572,v.
Schempp, 374 U.S.(1963), 83 S.Ct.
10 L.Ed.2d 844 to the effect that "it is
necessary in a free exercise case for one to show
the coerciveagainsteffectofthe enactment as it oper-
ates himdiversityinthepracticeofhisMcRae,religion.”
Given the wide of effects in the
Court appeared to be saying itneeded the partic-
ipation of individuals to determine the applica-
tion of the guaranteenot,inthink,avarietyof circum-
stances. This is we a ruling that an
association cannot take a position contrary to
ing, the interests of some members. McRae was a
case where quite particularized information was
required.

tional standing. The defendant Secretary
of Labor asked the Court to overrule Hunt,
do away with associational standing, and
require members of an association to sue
only under class action procedures. The
Secretary said that the class action had
safeguards to ensure that the diverse inter-
ests of members are properly represented
but that associational standing, as the
Court had approached it, did not contain
such safeguards. Paraphrasing the Secre-
tary’s argument, the Court said “an associ-
ation might prove an inadequate represent-
ative of its members’ legal interests” be-
cause, among other things, it “might bring
lawsuits without authorization from its
membership” or “the litigation strategy se-
lected by the association might reflect the
views of only a bare majority— or even an
influential minority— of the full member-
ship.” Id. at 2532.
Significantly, the Court did not respond
by denying these points but instead
stressed the other benefits of associational
standing, 106 S.Ct. at 2532-33,8 and then
stated: “We are not prepared to dismiss
out of hand the Secretary’s concern that
associations allowed to proceed under
Hunt will not always be able to represent
adequately the interests of all their injured
members. Should an association be defi-
cient in this regard, a judgment won
against it might not preclude subsequent
claims by the association’s members with-
out offending due process principles. And
were we presented with evidence that such
a problem existed either here or in cases of
this type, we would have to consider how it
might be alleviated.” Id. at 2533. Thus,
the Court appeared to deal with the prob-
8. In the UAW opinion the Court appears to
assume that the benefits of the association’s
expertise would be lost ifassociational standing
were denied and class action procedures re-
quired. It isnot clear why this should be true.
The association’s leaders and legal counsel
could organize and bring the class action, there-
by adding the safeguards of that procedure to
the litigatingbenefits the association provides.
9. Members adversely affected by an associa-
tion’s litigation victory might be able to reliti-
gate the claim on which the association pre-
vailed without operation of preclusion princi-
ples, i.e.,resjudicata or collateral estoppel. But
while the Court’sUAWopinion suggests that an
1233
lem of conflicting interests by saying that
associational standing was too valuable to
jettison and offering possible safeguards
for members whose interests were adverse
to the litigating position taken by the asso-
ciation.
If the Supreme Court’s UAWopinion de-
cided that associational standing is not de-
feated by conflicting member interests, as
we rather think it did, we are, course,
of
bound by that. But the matter is not en-
tirely clear and we should state why we
would reach that conclusion in any event.
Most, or perhaps all, associations, even
though created to serve the members’com-
mon interests, will have internal conflicts
about appropriate organizational policies.
Such conflicts are typically resolved by the
association’s internal procedures or politi-
cal structure. Inevitably, some resolutions
will harm some members’ interests, but
that is usually accepted as part of the cost
of obtaining the benefits of association.
Courts would ordinarily uphold an associa-
tion’s determinations against internal chal-
lenge unless it were shown that the orga-
nization’s own procedures had been violat-
ed. It is not obvious to us that this ratio-
nale should not apply to an association’s
internal resolution of conflicts about litigat-
ing positions.

This is not to say that dissenting mem-
bers, who are bound by the association’s
decision as to the association’s litigating
position, are also bound as individuals.9
Without deciding the point, for no union
dissidents are before us, several possibili-
ties come to mind. Members, as individu-
organization’s litigation loss"might not preclude
subsequent claims by [its]members without of-
fending due process principles," 106 S.Ct. at
2533, this dictum, if followed, stillwould not
determine the preclusive effect of an organiza-
tion’slitigation victory. In any event, we do not
rely on the absence of preclusion for our hold-
ing in this case.
It is also possible that members injured by a
litigation victory may have a cause of action
arising therefrom for breach of fiduciary duty
or of the organization’s by-laws, charter or gov-
erning statutes against those who initiated the
suit. But again, our analysis does not turn on
the possibility of these remedies.

1234
als or groups, if they had standing, could
intervene to advance their interests in the
merits against the association’s position.
It may be that they could challenge the
association’sstanding by showing that the
procedures for adopting a position had
been ignored. A union might present a
special case of this. If a union sought a
litigation victory that would harm some
workers to benefit others, that might give
rise to a claim by employees in the bargain­
ing unit that the union had breached its
duty of fair representation. In such a situ­
ation, the union’s duty of fair representa­
tion itself, if clearly implicated by the un­
ion’s requested relief, could perhaps de­
prive the union of organizational standing.
But that duty derives from and reaches no
further than the union’sauthority as exclu­
sive collective bargaining representative of
the employees. See Hines v. Anchor Mo­
tor Freight, Inc., 424 U.S. 554, 564, 96
S.Ct. 1048, 1056, 47 L.Ed.2d 231 (1976);
National Treasury Employees Union v.
FLRA, 800 F.2d 1165, 1169-70 (D.C.Cir.­
1986). In this case, none of the Unions’
claims is within the ambit of their exclusive
bargaining authority and the duty of fair
represéntation is not implicated. See
NTEU v. FLRA, 800 F.2d at 1170.
For the reasons given, we think that the
mere fact of conflicting interests among
members of an association does not of it-
self defeat the association’s standing to
urge the interests of some members in
litigation, even though success may harm
the legal interests of other members. We
hold, therefore, that the Unions have asso-
ciational standing to maintain this suit so
long as their members individually would
have standing to maintain it. We now turn
to the latter issue.
III.
The law of standing comprises a set of
constitutional and prudential requirements.
Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 498, 95 S.Ct.
2197, 2204,45 L.Ed.2d 343(1975). We first
apply the constitutional requirements to
the Unions’ claims.

To ensure the presence of a “case”
or “controversy,” as article III of the Con-
stitution requires, a litigant must show
that he has suffered injury as a result of
the defendant’s putatively illegal conduct
and that his injury both may be traced to
the challenged conduct and is likely to be
redressed by the judicial relief he seeks.
E.g., Valley Forge Christian College v.
Americans United for Separation of
Church & State, Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 472,
102 S.Ct. 752, 758, 70 L.Ed.2d 700 (1982).
The distinction between the “traceability”
and “redressability” requirements, two as­
pects of the causation requirement for
standing, becomes pertinent when the liti­
gant’s injury is not traceable to the wrong­
ful conduct he complains of, but the relief
he seeks is so broad that it would none­
theless redress his injury. See Warth, 422
U.S. at 499, 95 S.Ct. at 2205; Mideast Sys.
& China Civil Constr. Saipan Joint Ven­
ture, Inc. v. Hodel, 792 F.2d 1172, 1176
(D.C.Cir.1986). In addition, the relief the
litigant seeks is crucial to the determina­
tion of his standing; he may possess stand­
ing as to one form of relief but not as to
another. See City of Los Angeles v.
Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 103 S.Ct. 1660, 75
L.Ed.2d 675 (1983)(although damage stand­
ing available, injunctive standing not).
While it is undisputed that the Unions
have article III standing to bring their
claims based on OMB Circular A-76, we
hold that they have failed to allege a causal
connection between the alleged violation of
the Service Contract Act and injury to any
of their members.

A.
The “remedial purpose” of the Service
Contract Act is “to protect prevailing labor
standards,” 41 U.S.C. § 353(b) (1982); the
Act is meant to prevent the government
from “subsidizing” low wages to private-
sector service employees by awarding
government contracts to those who can bid
low by paying low wages. See American
Fed’n of Gov’tEmployees, Local 1668 v.
Dunn, 561 F.2d 1310, 1312 (9th Cir.1977).
To this end, the Act, inter alia, requires
most government service contracts to con-
tain a “provision specifying” the minimum
wages and fringe benefits contract employ-

ees must receive from their private employ-
er; the wages and benefits are specified by
the Secretary of Labor in accordance with
prevailing private wage and benefit levels
for comparable employees in the locality.
41 U.S.C. § 351(a)(1),(2) (1982).
By definition, the Act has no effect on
the wages the government pays its employ-
ees, but applies only to government con-
tracts with private employers. The Secre-
tary of Labor has the power to interpret,
administer and enforce the Act. See 41
U.S.C. §§ 352-358 (1982). In particular,
the Act establishes various sanctions the
government may apply to contractors who
fail to meet their contractual obligations to
provide the wages and benefits established
by the Secretary’s determination: The
government may pay monies due under the
contract instead to the underpaid employ-
ees, id. § 352(a); the government may law-
fully cancel the contract altogether, id.
§ 352(c); and the defaulting contractor is
ineligible for any government contract
awards for three years, id. § 354(a).
We see from this sketch of the Act that
it bestows no legal right on any employees
except those of the winning bidder and no
legal duty on private employers or the
government except with respect to those
employees. Thus the Unions have not in-
voked the Act as a statute that of itself
grants, as to them, “legal rights, the inva-
sion of which creates standing.” Warth,
422 U.S. at 500, 95 S.Ct. at 2206 (internal
quote omitted).10
B.

The Unions’ complaint, which should be
the primary vehicle by which a litigant
assures the court of its standing, see

10. Whether the Act creates a legal right, the
invasion of which would constitute injury for
purposes of standing,whether,isaquestiongivenwholly
tinct from that fact,of an indepen­
dent injury in the Act’szone of interests
was intended by Congress to permit the plaintiff
to asserthis injury—in fact. See Clarke v.Securi­
tiesIndus. Ass’n, U.S. -, 107 S.Ct. 750,
754-56, 93 L.Ed.2d 757 (1987).
11. In their complaint, the Unions allege that
Lavino will fund the wages it must pay its
employees under the Act while in American
waters by reducing the wages it would other-
1235
Warth, 422 U.S. at 501-02, 95 S.Ct. at
2206-07, does not provide a clear identifica-
tion of the injury the Unions rely upon for
their standing. Giving their complaint a
generous interpretation, we believe the Un-
ions have asserted two different injuries to
their members: the loss of jobs by Union
members displaced by Lavino employees
pursuant to the contract award, and the
loss of job opportunities by Union members
who would have been employed by Marine
Transport on the ships if Marine Transport
had won the award. The Unions do not
allege as injury any threat that Lavino will
pay less than the prevailing wages and
benefits yet to be determined by the Secre-
tary of Labor. Indeed, the Unions could
not allege any such injury in this case,
since the contract specifically requires La-
vino to pay, retroactive to the date of the
award, whatever wages and benefits the
Secretary11ultimately determines to be “pre-
vailing.”
The injury to the Unions’members,
therefore, is simply the loss of present or
future jobs as a result of the contract
award. The violation of the Act alleged by
the Unions is the award of a contract to
Lavino that did not contain a specific wage
and benefit determination from the Labor
Secretary. Although we have no doubt
that the Unions’ injury constitutes a “dis­
tinct and palpable” injury sufficient to con­
fer standing, Warth, 422 U.S. at 501, 95
S.Ct. at 2206, we hold that this injury is
neither fairly traceable to the putatively
illegal omission of a wage determination
from the contract nor fairly redressable by
the remedy the Unions seek. Nothing in
the record suggests that Lavino would not
have won the contract if the MSC had

wise pay them while outside the American wa-
ters and not subject to the Act. According to
dis­ this theory, the ultimate wage determination by
the Secretary would be irrelevant to Lavino’s
(or presumably anyone else’s)bid amount, and
this court’signorance concerning that determi-
nation's effect on the bids would be a blissful
ignorance. But this approach depends on a
claim of injury to Lavino’s employees, whom
the Unions do not represent and whom we have
no reason to presume the Unions ever will rep-
resent.

1236
delayed its award until it could incorporate
a wage determination in the solicitation.
On the Union’s theory, the absence of a
wage determination would have illegally
tainted the contract no matter who had
won it. If we gave the Unions the relief
they seek by setting aside the award and
ordering a resolicitation with a specific
wage determination, the injury to their
members might well not be cured by an
award to Marine Transport or government
retention of the ships’ operation. Since
substantial barriers to the alleviation of the
Unions’injury would remain regardless of
the outcome of this litigation, it is irrele­
vant, although true, that our setting aside
the award would remove one “absolute bar­
rier” to alleviation of the Unions’ injury.
See Greater Tampa Chamber of Com­
merce v. Goldschmidt, 627 F.2d 258 (D.C.­
Cir.1980).
There is not even an indication that Ma-
rine Transport would even be willing to
re-bid if we granted the Unions the remedy
they seek— indeed, Marine Transport’s ab-
sence from this litigation strongly suggests
the contrary. Nor is there any reason to
believe that the government’s own cost as-
sessment, which is not affected by the
Act’sapplicability, would materially change
in a re-bidding. In addition, this court has
no way of knowing what the wage determi-
nation by the Labor Secretary, who is not a
party to this litigation, will be. And in
calculating their bids, both Marine Trans-
port and Lavino necessarily estimated what
they believed the Secretary would ultimate-
ly determine the schedule of prevailing
wages and benefits to be. See National
Maritime Union, 632 F.Supp. at 415. This
court also cannot know whether or how the
wage and benefit levels assumed in the
losing bid of Marine Transport would
change relative to those assumed by Lavi-
no, if these two bidders upon resolicitation
recalculated their bids using whatever ulti-
mate determination is actually issued by
the Secretary. In sum, the small likelihood
that Marine Transport would participate in
a re-bidding with the wages the Act re-
quires, the fact that the Act’s applicability
has no effect on the government’s internal
cost analysis, and the uncertainty about the
effect of the private bidders' assumed
wage and benefit levels on the bids in the
second round of bidding allpoint to a single
conclusion— that the injury to the Unions’
members is causally speculative. See Gull
Airborne Instruments, Inc. v. Wein­
berger, 694 F.2d 838, 842 & n. 3 (D.C.Cir.­
1982)(penultimate low bidder’s standing to
obtain maladministered government con­
tract’s resolicitation fails since likelihood of
thereafter winning award merely “conjec­
tural”); see also American Soc’yof Travel
Agents, Inc. v. Blumenthal, 566 F.2d 145
(D.C.Cir.1977)(challenge by travel agents
to tax treatment of travel programs of
tax-exempt entities fails for want of stand­
ing, since claim that plaintiffs’ business
would improve absent challenged treat­
ment speculative); Public Citizen v. Lock­
heed Aircraft Corp., 565 F.2d 708 (D.C.Cir.­
1977)(standing denied trade association to
contest government asset sale due to spec-­
ulativeness of injuries alleged); American
Fed’n of Gov’tEmployees v. Hoffman, 427
F.Supp. 1048, 1082-83 (N.D.Ala.1976)(chal­
lenge by government employees to govern­
ment labor contracts with third parties fails
for want of standing due to lack of causa­
tion). We conclude that the presence in the
causal chain of these “independent varia­
bles,” Mideast Sys., 792 F.2d at 1178,
which depend on the decisions of third par­
ties not before this court, defeats the Un­
ions’standing. See id. at 1177 (where only
result of remedy plaintiff seeks would be
withdrawal of contracts from winning bid­
ders and award of contract to plaintiff
must come from third party not before
court, plaintiff lacks standing).

C.

The Unions have indirectly suggested
that the analysis we have just set out
would prove too much, because it would
also deny standing to a disappointed bid­
der, such as Marine Transport. Dis­
appointed bidders have had standing in this
circuit to challenge government procure­
ments since Scanwell Laboratories, Inc. v.
Shaffer, 424 F.2d 859, 861-73 (D.C.Cir.­
1970). To clarify the scope of our holding,

we explain why the Unions’ suggestion is
mistaken.
First, if Marine Transport were a plain-
tiff in this litigation, its implicit assurance
to this court that it “stands ready, willing
and able” to re-bid would indicate that ex-
ercise of the judicial remedial power would
not be in vain. See Orange Park Florida
T.V., Inc. v. FCC, 811F.2d 664, 672 & n. 18
(D.C.Cir.1987) (assurance of license appli-
cant’sintent to reapply contributes to satis-
faction of causation requirement). More-
over, if Marine Transport were a party, the
pleadings in this case could present the
court with some account of the wage as-
sumptions underlying Marine Transport’s
bid, thus reducing the conjectural character
of the causal chain. Indeed, since Marine
Transport had vigorously opposed the re-
scission of the initial award, we view it as
at least possible, if not probable, that Ma-
rine Transport did not join this litigation
because it believed that, even if it pre-
vailed, it still would not be the low bidder.
But in addition to the far greater
factual uncertainties that result from Ma­
rine Transport’s absence is a distinction of
law: A disappointed bidder that claims il­
legality in a procurement alleges an injury
beyond its economic loss of the contract.
The disappointed bidder may also claim in­
jury to its right to a legally valid procure­
ment process. See CACI, Inc.-Federal v.
United States, 719 F.2d 1567, 1572-75
(Fed.Cir.1983); B.K. Instrument, Inc. v.
United States, 715 F.2d 713, 717-23 (2d
Cir.1983) (Friendly, J.); Control Data
Corp. v. Baldrige, 655 F.2d 283, 293 (D.C.­
Cir.1981) (overruled on other grounds— by
Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass’n, U.S.
-, 107 S.Ct. 750, 757 n. 15, 93 L.Ed.2d
757 (1987)); Dunn, 561 F.2d at 1313; Mer­
riam v. Kunzig, 476 F.2d 1233, 1242 n. 7
(3d Cir.1973); Keco Indus., Inc. v. United
States, 428 F.2d 1233, 1236-38 (Ct.Cl.1970).
This right is implicitly bestowed on all bid­
ders by the mandatory language of the
federal procurement statutes, see, e.g., 10
12. This is not to suggest that such an injured
bidder would necessarily be able to obtain a
valid re-solicitation,regardless of itsactual like-
lihood of obtaining the award. Presumably a
bidder who believed that it would have no sig-
1237
U.S.C. §§ 2304, 2305 (Supp. Ill 1985),and
by the contractual invitation to bid embod-
ied in the solicitation. See, e.g., CACI, 719
F.2d at 1574.
Most of the cases that address the bid-
der’s right to a valid procurement invoke
the right as a means to resolve the zone-of-
interest question, which is not an element
of article III standing but an independent
prudential limitation on standing. E.g.,
B.K. Instrument, 715 F.2d at 719-20;
Control Data, 655 F.2d at 293. But we
believe that reference to the bidder’s dis-
tinctive legal right is essential to article III
standing in a procurement challenge. Oth-
erwise, lack of causation might often dis-
able the bidder’s simple reliance on eco-
nomic injury in fact for its standing. We
agree with the Federal Circuit, which in an
excellent discussion of bidder standing re-
sponded to a suggestion that a dis-
appointed bidder lacked standing due to a
failure of causation:
The flaw in the government’s argu-
ment here is that it misconceives the
nature of the injury that unsuccessful
bidders seek to rectify in bid protest
suits. Scanwell itself recognized that a
disappointed bidder has “no right ... to
have the contract awarded to it in the
event the ... court finds illegality in the
award of the contract_” 424 F.2d at
864. The injury CACI here asserts is
that the government’s breach of its im-
plied contract to deal fairly with all bid-
ders denied CACI the opportunity to
have its bid considered solely on its mer-
its. An injunction barring the award
would correct this alleged injury since it
would require the government, if it
wants to go ahead with the procurement,
to repeat the bidding process under cir-
cumstances that would eliminate the al-
leged taint of the prior proceedings.
CACI, 719 at
F.2d 1575.12
In short, injury to a bidder’s right to a
fair procurement is obviously an injury
nificant likelihood of obtaining the bid on re-so-
licitationwould not bring suit. Ifsuch a bidder
nonetheless brought suit for itsnuisance value,
or for its legitimate bid preparation costs, its
suit may be dismissed if the bidder was not

1238
both traceable to the alleged illegality in a
procurement and redressable by any reme-
dy that eliminates the alleged illegality.13
Although their complaint is not wholly
clear on this point, the Unions apparently
do not attempt to invoke Marine Trans-
port’s legal right to a fair procurement in
behalf of their members. But even if the
Unions did clearly claim injury to this legal
right, the right is Marine Transport’s, not
theirs, and thus could not provide them
with a causally traceable and redressable
injury. See CACI, 719 F.2d at 1574(“only
persons injured” by government’s violation
of duty of fair procurement are unsuccess-
ful bidders).14

IV.

We do not doubt that the Unions have
article III standing in behalf of their mem-
bers to challenge the MSC’sdenial of an
administrative appeal from the Lavino
award and its failure to require Lavino to
grant first refusal rights to displaced tem-
porary civil service mariners. The Unions
allege that the mariners have a right to
appeal and that the temporary mariners
are entitled to a right of first refusal,
which are legal rights allegedly created by
regulation and contract. The injury to
each of these rights is the immediate result
of MSC’schallenged actions and the reme-
dies the Unions seek, an order to grant an
administrative appeal and a right of first
refusal to the affected mariners, would re-
dress these injuries.

"within the zoneCACI,ofactiveconsideration”1574-75,for
bid’saward. Assocs.,719F.2dat quotingSta
Morgan Business892,(Ct.Cl.1980).Inc.v.United
619 F.2d 896
Moreover, disappointed
13. when a bidder asks
not for a re-solicitationoriginalbutsimplyforrescission
and an beawardredressabilityoftheproblemcontracttother
would no even if the
bidder could allege only economic injury (al­
though traceability of that injury to the alleged
illegalitymight remain an insuperable barrier).We
See generally197,DeltaData(D.C.Cir.1984)Sys.Corp.v.
744 F.2d 203-06 (setting out
permissible circumstances for such a remedy).
The leading case in this circuit granting a
disappointed bidder standing to challenge a
government procurement, Scanwell Laborato­
ries,Inc. v. Shaffer, 424 F.2d 859, 861-73 (D.C.­
But the defendants argued, and the dis-
trict court stated, that the Unions none-
theless lacked standing to bring these
claims, because the interests they sought
to assert by bringing the claims fell outside
the “zone of interests” protected by OMB
Circular A-76, which “provides no private
right of action.” 632 F.Supp. at 416, 417.
We need not decide whether the Unions
lack standing to pursue their A-76 claims
under the prudential zone-of-interests test,
or whether Circular A-76 and its imple-
menting regulations give rise to a justicia-
ble cause of action. Our resolution of
these issues, which do not implicate our
constitutional jurisdiction or statutory jur-
isdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 (1982),
would not be dispositive in any event, be-
cause even if the Unions’position on each
of them is correct, we find that their A-76
claims fail on the merits.
A.

OMB Circular A-76 sets out guidelines
for federal agencies to follow in carrying
out the general policyof the government to
rely on competitive private enterprise to
supply its goods and services except when
government performance would be more
efficient. The Circular states that the au-
thorities for its issuance are statutes that
create an Office of Federal Procurement
Policy within OMB and authorize that of-
fice to issue uniform federal procurement
regulations and procedures. Circular A-
76, 113(Aug. 1983); see 41 U.S.C. §§ 401,
405, 405a (1982 & Supp. II 1984). The

the Cir.1970),focus,wasdecided prior to the Supreme
tes, Court's in cases like Warth, on the causa­
tion element in the law of standing. Unsurpris­
ingly, then, the Scanwell court did not give
attention to the meaning of the causation re­
quirement in the procurement context. Indeed,
it, the Scanwell decision’s emphasis on the dis­
e appointed bidder as “private attorney general,"
424 F.2d at 864, is difficult to square with any
reference to a causation requirement for stand­
ing, unless one analyzes the bidder’s injury as
bster,an injury to its right to a legal procurement.

14. In view of our disposition of the Unions’
article IIIstanding regarding their claim under
the Act, we do not reach the issue of whether
the Unions are within(thethezone of interests that
the Act protects basis on which the district
court dismissed this claim).

Circular states that it “shall provide admin-
istrative direction” to agencies but does not
“[establish and shall not be construed to
create any substantive or procedural basis
for anyone to challenge any agency action
or inaction ... [because it] was not in ac-
cordance with this Circular, except as spe-
cifically set forth in [the administrative ap-
peal provision].” Circular A-76, till7.a.,
7.c.(8). The appeal provision says that each
agency “shall establish an administrative
appeals procedure to resolve [certain] ques-
tions from directly affected parties,” who
are defined to include “federal employees
and their representative organizations,” for
the purpose of providing “an administra-
tive safeguard to ensure that agency deci-
sions are fair and equitable and in accord-
ance with [certain] procedures [in this Cir-
cular].” Circular A-76, 116.g.; Supplement
to Circular A-76, Part I, ch. 2, 111.2.(Aug.
1983). Immediately thereafter the Circular
states: “The procedure does not authorize
an appeal outside the agency or a judicial
review.” Id. These provisions have been
implemented with substantially identical
language by the Department of Defense
regulations governing procurements. See
32 C.F.R. § 169a.l8(a) (1986).
The Circular also provides that each
agency “shall exert maximum effort to find
available positions for adversely affected
employees, including ... advising [them]
that they have the right of first refusal for
employment on the contract in positions for
which they are qualified.” Supplement to
Circular A-76, Part I, ch. 3, 11D.2. This
provision of the Circular has been imple-
mented by procurement regulations of the
Department of Defense that include a first-
refusal clause in the terms of its contract
solicitation. See 32 C.F.R. § 169a.l7(d)(4)
(1986); 48 C.F.R. § 52.207-3 (1986).

B.
Although the district court’s operative
disposal of these claims was for want of
standing, the district court on cross-mo-
tions for summary judgment found that the
undisputed facts supported entry of sum-
mary judgment for defendants. Accord-
ingly, this court has a factual record upon
1239
which to decide the merits of the Unions’
appeal and first-refusal claims. See, e.g.,
Sadlowski v. United(D.C.Cir.1981).Steelworkers,645
F.2d 1114. 1120
We need not decide whether the proper
standard of review in this case subjects the
Unions to the especially heavy burden a
disappointed bidder must carry in challeng-
ing government procurement decisions,
Kentron Hawaii, Ltd. v. Warner, 480 F.2d
1166, 1169 (D.C.Cir.1973),or simply to the
routine standard of review under the Ad-
ministrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. § 706
(1982). Even under the weaker test, the
Unions’ claims fail.
We hold first that the MSC’sdenial
of a second administrative appeal was rea­
sonable. Although the pertinent regula­
tions (following Circular A-76) state that
there “shall” be an “administrative appeal
procedure” generally, nothing in those reg­
ulations prevents the agency from finding
in a particular instance that an appeal
would be futile. We, of course, must defer
to an agency’s interpretation of its own
regulations that is not “plainly inconsist­
ent” with their wording. United States v.
Larionoff, 431 U.S. 864, 872-73, 97 S.Ct.
2150, 2155-56, 53 L.Ed.2d 48 (1977). The
appeal regulations permit a challenge to
the decision to contract out but not to any
distinction between private bidders or to
government “management decisions.” 32
C.F.R. § 169a.l8(a)(l) (1986). The MSC
reasonably believed that an appeal of its
contracting-out to Lavino would be futile,
since neither the government’s cost-esti­
mate for continued government operation
nor the gap between the government’s esti­
mate and the private bidders’proposals had
materially changed from the prior solicita­
tion. In addition, the Unions in their role
as representatives of the displaced mari­
ners had both the incentive and the oppor­
tunity to appeal the original award to Ma­
rine Transport. The MSC reasonably de­
nied them a second opportunity to appeal.
We also reject the Unions’ claim
that the decision not to extend first-refusal
rights to displaced temporary mariners was
contrary to the applicable regulations.
These regulations, and the provision in the

1240
Lavino contract that mirrors them, require
that the first-refusal right be granted to
displaced government “employees.” See
32 C.F.R. § 169.al7(d)(4) (1986); 48 C.F.R.
§ 62.207-3 (1986). We find nothing in this
language that requires the right to be ex-
tended to temporary employees. The Un-
ions point to language in the Navy’sHand-
book on Commercial Activities Program
providing that temporary employees are
“eligible” to receive the first-refusal right.
But even if we were not again obliged to
defer to the MSC's interpretation of its
regulations — here itsdenial that temporary
employees must receive the right— lan-
guage that renders temporary employees
“eligible” for the right says nothing about
whether the employees are not simply eligi-
ble but entitled to the right— indeed, the
negative implication of the use of the term
“eligible” suggests they are not entitled.
Moreover, MSC’sbasis for denying the
first-refusal right to displaced temporary
mariners is reasonable. MSC denied them
the right because it feared that, in a tight
job market for mariners, they would de-
prive displaced permanent mariners, the
members of MSC's career work-force, of
possible positions with Lavino. We see no
reason to overturn that determination.

V.

In summary, although we find that on
the facts of this case the Unions would
have associational standing for all their
claims if their members would have stand-
ing, we hold that the Union members lack a
causally traceable injury to support the Un-
ions’ standing to bring their claim under
the Service Contract Act. We assume
without deciding that the Unions have
standing to bring their appeal and first-re-
fusal claims, and that these two narrow
categories of claims are justiciable rather
than committed to the MSC’s discretion,
since we find that each of the claims lacks
merit in any event. Accordingly, the dis-
trict court’s entry of summary judgment
for defendants in this case is
Affirmed.
Mary BARTLETT, on Behalf of
Josephine NEUMAN, Appellant
v.
BOWEN,
Otis R. Secretary, Health and
Human Services.

James T. MARTIN, Jr.
v.
D.C. METROPOLITAN POLICE
DEPARTMENT, et al. Richard
Xander, et al., Appellants.

UNITED STATES of America,
Appellant

v.
Christine MEYER, et al.

Nos. 85-5233, 85-6071, 85-6072, 85-6169,
85-6171 and 85-6172.
United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.

July 31, 1987.

ON SUGGESTION FOR
REHEARING EN BANC
Before WALD, Chief Judge, and
ROBINSON, MIKVA, EDWARDS,
RUTH B. GINSBURG, BORK, STARR,
SILBERMAN, BUCKLEY, WILLIAMS
and D.H. GINSBURG, Circuit Judges.

PER CURIAM.

85-5233

ORDER
Court, motion,
The on its own has recon-
sidered appellee’ssuggestion for rehearing
en banc. Upon such reconsideration, it is
ORDERED, by the Court en banc, on its
own motion, that the order of the en banc
court of June 8, 1987, and the panel order
of the same date, be, and the same hereby
are, vacated, and it is
FURTHER ORDERED, by the Court en
banc, on its own motion, that the judg-
