Amalgamated Meat Cutters & Butcher Workmen v. Connally — 337 F. Supp. 737 (D.D.C. 1971) (three-judge court) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/1469915.pdf

AMALGAMATED MEAT CUTTERS AND
BUTCHER WORKMEN OF NORTH
AMERICA, AFL-CIO, Plaintiff,
v.
John B. CONNALLY, Individually, and
Chairman of the Cost of Living Coun-
cil, et al.,Defendants.
Civ. A. No. 1833-71.
United States District Court,
District of Columbia.
Oct. 22, 1971.
737

as

738

739

740

741

742

1. Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher
Workmen of North America, AFD-CIO.
Albert Gore, Chicago, 111.,with whom
Jerry Anker, Washington, D. C., and
Soloman I. Hirsh, Chicago, 111.,were on
the papers, for plaintiffs.
David J. Anderson, Dept, of Justice,
with whom L. Patrick Gray, III, then
Asst. Atty. Gen., Civil Div., Thomas A.
Flannery, then U. S. Atty., and Schiffer,Harland
F. Feathers and Stuart E.
Dept, of Justice, were on the papers, for
federal defendants.
Charles A. Horsky, Washington, D. C.,
for defendant Swift and Co.
Robert J. Corber, Washington, D. C.,
for defendant Armour & Co.
Richard J. Wertheimer, Washington,
D. C., for defendant Hygrade Food Prod-
ucts Corp.
Laurence Wood, Washington, D. C.,
for defendants Wilson Certified Foods,
Wilson-Sinclair and Wilson Beef & Lamb
Co.
Stanley R. Strauss, Washington, D. C.,
for defendant Cudahy Packing Co.
Before LEVENTHAL, Circuit Judge,
and ROBINSON and RICHEY, Dis-
trict Judges.
OPINION IN SUPPORT OF ORDER
DENYING INJUNCTION
LEVENTHAL, Circuit Judge:
In this litigation Plaintiff Union, the
Amalgamated Meat Cutters1 suing on
its own behalfunions,andon behalf of its
affiliated local attacks the con-
stitutionality of the Economic Stabiliza-
tion Act of 1970 (Act2), contained in

2. P.L. 91-379, 84 Stat. 799; as amended,
P.L. 91-558, 84 Stat. 1468; P.L. 92-8,
85 Stat. 13; P.L. 92-15, 85 Stat. 38.
The Act is setforth at 12 U.S.C. § 1904,
note.

Title II of Public Law 91-379, 84 Stat.
799, and appended as Annex A, and
governmental actions thereunder. .
Two different actions are consolidated
in the complaint. Count II seeks to
require the major meat packing com-
panies 3 to perform their obligations, un-
der their 1970 collective bargaining
agreements with the Union, to grant a
general wage increase of twenty-five
cents an hour effective September 6,
1971. The Union asserts this wage in-
crease was agreed upon in April 1970
after long and difficult negotiations,
that the parties carefully weighed alter-
native benefits and concessions before
agreeing on the specific provisions, and
that its inclusion was decisive in ob-
taining the Union’s acceptance. The em-
ployers respond that the implementation
of the wage increase obligation would
violate Executive Order 11615, 36 F.R.
15727, promulgated by President Nixon
August 15, 1971, appended as Annex B.
This Executive Order, Stabilization of
Prices, Rents, Wages and Salaries, es-
tablishes a 90-day price-wage freeze, a
requirement that “prices, rents, wages
and salaries shall be stabilized for a
period of 90 days” at levels no greater
than the highest rates pertaining to a
substantial volume of actual transactions
by the seller of commodities or services
involved in a specified base period pre-
ceding August 15. The Union’s position
is that this defense is insufficient as a
matter of law because the Act is uncon-
stitutional and the Executive Order in-
valid.
The broader aspect of the controversy
before us appears in Count I of the

3. Swift & Co., Armour & Co., Hygrade
Food Products Corp., Wilson Certified
Foods, Wilson-Sinclair Corp., Wilson
Beef & Lamb Co., John Morrell & Co.,
and Cudahy Packing Co.

4. Chairman: Secretary of the Treasury,
Vice Chairman: Chairman of the Council
of Economic Advisers, Other members:
Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of
Commerce, Secretary of Labor, Director
of the Office of Management and Budget,
Director of the Office of Emergency Pre-
743

complaint, an action brought against
John B. Connally, who as Secretary of
the Treasury is Chairman of the Cost
of Living Council, and the other officials
constituting the Council. In Executive
Order 11615 President Nixon established
the Cost of Living Council “which shall
act as an agency of the United States,”
specified that it shall be composed of4
certain designated officials as members
and “delegated to the Council all of the
powers conferred on the President by the
Economic Stabilization. Act of 1970.”
In Count I the Union seeks a declara-
tory judgment that the Act and Execu-
tive Order 11615 are illegal and uncon-
stitutional, and also an injunction
against the officials named as defend-
ants, individually and as members of the
Council, restraining and enjoining them
from administering or giving any force
or effect to the Executive Order and the
Act. In view of the prayer for injunction
a three-judge District Court was con-
vened October 3, 1971, pursuant to 28
U.S.C. §§ 2282, 2284. We heard oral
argument October 8, 1971 on the Union’s
motion for preliminary injunction. The
court rejects the Union’s contention
that the Act and Executive Order are
invalid on their face, for the reasons
set forth below.
A. GOVERNMENT’S CONTENTION
OF ADEQUACY OF REMEDY
AT LAW
The federal defendants raise a thresh-
old claim that the Union’s prayer for an
injunction must be dismissed because it
has an adequate remedy at law. This
contention would not remove the litiga-
tion, since the Union could maintain ac-

paredness, Special Assistant to the Pres-
ident for Consumer Affairs. All these
officials were named as defendants in
this action, individually and as members
of the Council, and will be referred to
as the “Federal defendants.”
The Order also provides: “The Chair-
man of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System shall serve as
adviser to the Council.” The Federal
Reserve Chairman, Dr. Arthur Burns,
was not named as a defendant.

744
tion against the employers and challenge
the constitutionality of the Act and order
presented as a defense. However the
jurisdiction of this three-judge district
court depends on both a substantial con-
stitutional question and equity jurisdic-
tion of the action for injunction. We
conclude we have requisite equity juris-
diction.
familiar doctrine,
a litigant’sWhile under injunctive relief
requires showingclaimto irreparable injury
inadequacya of remedies,
and “practical of legal Theatres,thes
are Westover,terms.” Beacon500, 507,
Inc. v.948, 359 U.S.(1959). 79
S.Ct. 3 L.Ed.2d 988may ultimatelyThe
mere fact that a court discretion,
decide in the exercise of its
including balance of conveniences, that
an injunction should not be issued— even
assuming for purpose of decision that
plaintiff has a valid claim on the mer­
its— does not negative equity jurisdic­
tion. Where the action seeks to enjoin
enforcement of a Federal statute on the
ground of unconstitutionality, this would
not negative the jurisdiction of a statu­
tory three-judge district court. Broadly
speaking such actions to contest a stat­
ute’svalidity, like actions to review Fed­
eral administrative action5, may be
maintained by a proceeding for injunc­
tion or declaratory judgment or both.
Even where a declaratory judg­

ment is available, the three-judge district
court has equity jurisdiction so long as
there is a reasonable possibility that it
may approve of an injunction in order
to give complete protection to constitu­
tional rights 6. Relegating the Union to
the remedies contemplated by the Gov­
ernment would involvedamageamultiplicity of
litigation. Multiple actions, or
their declaratory equivalent, would be
required by this Union, and possibly also
by its affiliates, not only against the
defendant meat packers, but also against
various employers in other industries—

5. K. Davis, Administrative Law 731
(1951).
retail foods; fur and leather; food-proc-canning;
essing; poultry and seafood;
and miscellaneous non-food industries.
It is alleged that the Union and its af-
filiates have entered into collective bar-
gaining agreements with employers, pro-
viding for increases scheduled to take
effect during the 90-day freeze period
of Executive Order 11615, affecting in
excess of 150,000employees.
There is palpably a significant
difference to these thousands of employ­
ees between the receipt of these increases
e at the times agreed, available to meet
any obligations programmed on their re­
ceipt, and any subsequent declaration of
right. We need not pursue the question
whether a court might have reason to
withhold injunctive relief, particularly a
preliminary injunction, even though it
had been the the
convinced of merit of
Union’ssubstantive claims. As we have
indicated we do not accept the Union’s
position on the merits. But for present
purposes we are concerned with a thresh­
old objection, that the lack of equity
jurisdiction precludes our even giving
consideration to the merits of the Un­
ion’sposition. That contention we can­
not accept. Applying familiar principles,
the Union’s action, seeking to prevent
hardship to its members and multiplicity
of litigation, clearly comes within the
court’s equity jurisdiction.

B. CLAIM OF UNCONSTITUTION-
ALITY OF ACT AS DELEGATION
OF LEGISLATIVE POWER

The mainunconstitutionallyclaimofthedelegatesUnionis
that the Act President,
legislative power to the inprin­vio­
lation of the general constitutionalPowers,
ciple of the Separation of I, andI
in contravention of Article Section
of the Constitution, which provides:
“All legislative Powers herein granted
shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States.”

6. Green v. Connally, 330 F.Supp. 1150,
U.S.Dist.Ct. for Dist. of Col. (3-judge
court), June 30, 1971, 28 AFTR2d 71-
5164.

The Union’s position is that the Act’s
broad authority to the President “to
issue such orders and regulations as he
may deem appropriate to stabilize prices,
rents, wages and salaries” vests “un-
bridled legislative power in the Presi-
dent,” a “naked grant of authority” to
determine whether they “will be con-
trolled, and the scope, manner and timing
of those controls.”
The constitutional question thus put to
this court is novel and fraught with
difficulty, for we cannot blink the broad
discretion given to the President by the
Act.
The matter has been argued to us on
principle and precedent. The divergenc-
es in the principles perceived by the liti-
gants are matched by divergences in the
precedents they summon. The Govern-
ment cites numerous authorities but re-
lies most heavily on Yakus v. United
States, 321 U.S. 414, 64 S.Ct. 660, 88
L.Ed. 834 (1944), sustaining the grant
in the Emergency Price Control Act of
1942 of broad price-fixing authority.
The Union particularly invokes the 1935
decisions in Schechter Corp. v. United
States, 295 U.S. 495, 55 S.Ct. 837, 79
L.Ed. 1570, and Panama Refining Co. v.
Ryan, 293 U.S. 388, 55 S.Ct, 241, 79
L.Ed. 446, holding invalid provisions of
the National Industrial Recovery Act of
June 16, 1933, 48 Stat. 195.
We are of the view that the Yakus
ruling and principles there applied pro-
vide the more meaningful guidance for
the novel problem at hand, and that this
constitutional assault cannot be sus-
tained. We review the several interre-
lated considerations that lead us to this
conclusion.

1. Permissibility of delegation of legis-
lative power, within limits
We may usefully begin with
the modest observation that the Consti-

7. United States v. Grimaud, 220 U.S. 506,
517, 31 S.Ct. 480, 483, 55 L.Ed. 563
(1911). The Court upheld a law that
authorized the Secretary of the Interior to
make rules “to insure the objects” of
the national forests, and made violation
745
tution does not forbid every delegation
of “legislative” power. This was recog-
nized explicitly at least as long ago as
Norwegian Nitrogen Products Co. v.
United States, 288 U.S. 294, 305, 53 S.Ct.
350, 354, 77 L.Ed. 796 (1933), where Jus-
tice Cardozo stated that the tariff pro-
vision under consideration involved “in
substance a delegation, though a permis-
sible one, of the legislative process.”
There may thus be added to the out-
worn doctrines interred in the cause of
wisdom the conception developed in
Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649, 692-693,
12 S.Ct. 495, 505, 36 L.Ed. 294 (1892),
which centers the validity of a delegation
by Congress to the President on whether
he “was the mere agent of the law-
making department to ascertain and de-
clare the event upon which its expressed
will was to take effect.” That officials
may lawfully be given far greater au-
thority than the power to recognize a
triggering condition was recognized
within twenty years in the famous Grim-
aud case where a unanimous Court “ad-
mitted that it is difficult to define
the line which separates legislative pow-
er to make laws, from administra-
tive authority to make regulations.”7
There is no analytical difference, no
difference in kind, between the leg-
islative function — of prescribing rules
for the future — that is exercised by the
legislature or by the agency implement-
ing the authority conferred by the legis-
lature. The problem is one of limits.
An agency assigned to a task has its
freedom of action circumscribed not only
by the constitutional limitations that
bind Congress but by the perimeters de-

scribed by the legislature as hedgerows
defining areas open to the agency. The
question is the extent to which the Con-
stitution limits a legislature that may
think it proper and needful to give the

of such regulation punishable as a crime.
It reversed its initial 4-4 judgment af-
firming a decision, United States v.
Grimaud, 170 Fed. 205 (S.D.Cal.1909),
which held the law invalid.

746
agency broad flexibility to cope with the
conditions it encounters.
Governing concepts necessary
2. of
flexibility and accountability for con-
formance to “intelligible principle” and
legislative will
The legislative power granted to
Congress by the Constitution includes
the power to avail itself of “the neces­
sary resources of flexibility and practi­
cality * * * to perform its func-
tion8.” The spaciousness of the legis-
lative authority is underscored by the
following quotations from the Yakus
opinion voicing the elements of the ap-
plicable principles: “The Constitution as
a continuously operative charter of the
government does not demand the im-
possible or the impracticable.” Congress
is free to delegate legislative authority
provided it has exercised “the essentials
of the legislative function”— of deter-
mining the basic legislative policy and
formulatingby a rule,ruleofconduct—sanctions,heldsat-
isfiedprices“the with penalgreater
that shall not be regula-than
those fixed by maximum price
tions which conform to standards and
will tend to further the policy which
Congress has established.” The key
question is not answered by noting that
the authority delegated is broad, or
broader than Congress might have se-
lected if it had chosen to operate within
a narrower range. The issue is whether
the legislative description of the task
assigned “sufficiently marks the field
within which the Administrator is to act

8. Currin v. Wallace, 306 U.S. 1, 15, 59
S.Ct. 379, 387, 83 L.Ed. 441 (1939).
See also Buttfield v. Stranahan, 192 U.S.
470, 496, 24 S.Ct. 349, 355, 48 L.Ed. 525
(1904) : “Congress legislated on the sub-
ject as far as was reasonably practicable.”
Lichter v. United States, 334 U.S. 742,
785, 68 S.Ct. 1294, 1316 (1948) :
It is not necessary that Congress supply
administrative officials with a specific
formula for their guidance in a field
where flexibility and the adaptation of
the congressional policy to infinitely
variable conditions constitute the es-
sence of the program.
so thatkeptit may be known whether he
has legislativewithin it in compliance with
the will9.”
The Yakus ruling of Chief Jus­
tice Stone carries forward the doctrine
earlier articulated by Chief Justice Taft
in Hampton that there is no forbidden
delegation of legislative power “if Con­
gress shall lay down by legislative act
an intelligible principle” to which the
official or agency must conform10.
Concepts of control and ac­
countability define the constitutional re­
quirement. The principle permitting a
delegation of legislative power, if there
has been sufficient demarcation of the
field to permit a judgment whether the
agency has kept within the legislative
will, establishes a principle of accounta­
bility under which compatibility with
the legislative design may be ascertained
not only by Congress but by the courts
and the public11. That principle was
conjoined in Yakus with a recognition
that the burden is on the party who
assails the legislature’s choice of means
for effecting its purpose, a burden that
is met “[o]nly if we could say that
there is an absence of standards for the
guidance of the Administrator’s action,
so that it would be impossible in a prop­
er proceeding to ascertain whether the
will of Congress has been obeyed12.”
applied
These doctrines have been to
sustain legislation that delegated broad
authority indeed in order to assure req-
uisite flexibility to the officials or agen-
cies designated to discharge the tasks as-

9. These quotations appear in Yakus v.
United States, supra, 321 U.S. at 424 and
425, 64 S.Ct. at 667 and 668.
10. Hampton v. United States, 276 U.S.
394, 409, 48 S.Ct. 348, 352, 72 L.Ed.
624 (1928). The core quality of the
“intelligible principle” analysis is de-
veloped in L. Jaffe; An Essay on Delega-
tion of Legislative Power, 47 Col.L.Rev.
359, 561, at 569 (1947).

11. See the excerpt, quoted below at text
to footnote 37, from Yakus v. United
States, 321 U.S. at 426, 64 S.Ct. at 660.
12. Yakus v. United States, 321 U.S. at
426, 64 S.Ct. at 668.

signed by the Congress. New York Cen­
tral Securities Corp. v. United States,
287 U.S. 12, 24, 53 S.Ct. 45, 77 L.Ed.
138 (1932) (permitting consolidation of
carriers when “in the public interest”);
FPC v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S.
591, 600, 64 S.Ct. 281, 88 L.Ed. 333
(1944) (“just and reasonable” rates for
natural gas); Nat’l Broadcasting Co. v.
United States, 319 U.S. 190, 225-226,
63 S.Ct. 997, 87 L.Ed. 1344 (1943)
(licensing of radio communications “as
public convenience, interest or necessity
requires”); Lichter v. United States,
334 U.S. 742, 785-786, 68 S.Ct. 1294,
92 L.Ed. 1694 (1948) (recovery of “ex­
cessive profits” earned on war con­
tracts). But perhaps the broadest dele­
gation yet sustained and the one closest
to the case before us came in Yakus,
for the ultimate standard in the 1942
statute was only that the maximum
prices be “generally fair and equitable.”
3. Standards 0/ Act are sufficient, in
context of history, to permit court to
ascertain that 90-day “freeze” was in
conformance to legislative will
Under these governing concepts we
cannot say that in the Act before us
there is such an absence of standards
that it would be impossible to ascertain
whether the will of Congress has been
obeyed.
In some respects, indeed, Congress has
been precise in its limitations. The
President is given an authority to stabi-
lize prices and wages by § 202(a) of the
Act, but not at levels less than those
prevailing on May 25, 1970.

Moreover the legislation is not as vul-
nerable as it would have been prior to
the amendment adopted earlier in 1971,
under which the President is precluded
by § 202(b) from singling out “a par-

13. Sen.Rep.No.92-89, 92nd Cong. 1st Sess.,
p. 3,U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 1971,
pp. 661, 662.

14. That Act as passed January 30, 1942,
56 Stat. 23, permitted the administrator
to set maximum prices in a particular
industry where prices, in his judgment,
“have risen or threaten to rise to an
747
ticular industry or sector of the economy
upon which to impose controls” unless
he makes a specific finding that wages
or prices in that industry or sector have
increased at a rate disproportionate to
the rate for the economy as a whole.
This limitation was added in reaction to
the President’s limited exercise of power
to impose controls on union-negotiated
wages in the building and construction
industry. Legislative guidance is ampli-
fied in the pertinent committee report:
The Committee has serious reserva-
tions about applying the price and
wage control authority to a single in-
dustry. An industry subject to price
controls has no control over the price
it must pay for the products of other
industries. Likewise, workers subject
to wage controls have no protection
against a continued rise in the cost
of living. For these reasons, the com-
mittee hopes the administration will
adopt a voluntary system of wage-
price guideposts before applying man-
datory controls to any specific sector
of the economy.13
The limitation on the President’s pow-
er to take action in particular industries
or sectors made this authority more nar-
row than the authority over prices in
the 1942 legislation14. It also clarified
the will of Congress. Congress gave the
President broad authority to stabilize
prices, rents, wages and salaries, but in
effect it contemplated that controls to
achieveregulationbroadstabilization would begin
with a applicable to the entire
economy. While the subject matter was
broad, the technique was relatively con-
fined. Confronted with the continuing
and escalating inflation, Congress made
its will relatively plain, by giving the
President authority to halt the infla-
tionary escalation with the issuance of

extent or in a manner inconsistent with
the purposes of this Act.” The admin-
istrator issued maximum price regulations
for particular industries until the Gen-
eral Maximum Price Regulation, issued
April 30, 1942, 7 F.R. 3153, forbade the
sale of most commodities at prices in
excess of the highest price charged by
the seller during March 1942.

748
a regulation providing across-the-board
controls. The House Banking and Cur-
rency Committee Report specificallyget en-
visaged a 3-month “freeze” to “a
handle on inflation.”C). H.R.Rep. No. 91-
1330, p. 9 (Annex
This ascertainment of the con­
tours of the power to “stabilize” is forti­
fied by explicit legislative history. But
even the text of the law, the starting
point of analysis, must not be taken in
a vacuum. In rejecting claims of invalid
delegation of legislative power the Court
has made clear that the standards of a
statute are not to be tested in isolation15
and derive “meaningful content from the
purpose of the Act, its factual' back­
ground, and the statutory context16.”

The historical context of the 1970 law
is emphasized in the Government’s subm­
ission17 :
“In enacting the legislation in question
here, Congress was, of course, acting
against a background of wage and
price controls in two wars. The ad-
ministrative practice under both of
those Acts was the subject of extensive
judicial interpretation and review.
This substantial background of prior
law and practice provides a further
framework for assessing whether the
Executive has stayed within the
bounds authorized by Congress and
provides more than adequate standards

15. Intermountain Rate Cases, 234 U.S.
476, 487-88, 34 S.Ct. 986, 58 L.Ed. 1408
(1914).

16. American Power & Light Co. v. SEC,
329 U.S. 90, 104, 67 S.Ct. 133, 142, 91
L.Ed. 103 (1946) ; Fahey v. Mallonee,
332 U.S. 245,. 250-252, 67 S.Ct. 1552,
91 L.Ed­ 2030 (1947) ; Lichter v.
United States, 334 U.S. 742, 785, 68 S.Ct.
1294, 92 L.Ed. 1694 (1948).

17. Federal Defendants’ Points and Author-
ities in Opposition to Plaintiff’s Motion
for a Preliminary Injunction, Sept. 21,
1971, p. 20.

18. See Allen v. Grand Central Aircraft
Co., 347 U.S. 535, 74 S.Ct. 745, 98 L.Ed.
933 (1954), involving the wage stabiliza-
tor the exercise of the authority
granted by the Act.”
We think this contention is
sound. The context of the 1970 stabiliza­
tion law includes the stabilization stat­
utes passed in 1942, and the stabilization
provisions in Title IV of the Defense
Production Act of 195018,and the “com­
mon lore” of anti-inflationary controls
established by the agency approaches and
court decisions, including the probing
analyses of the Emergency Court of Ap­
peals. We do not suggest that the 1970
law was intended as or constitutes a dup­
licate of the earlier laws. But those laws
and their implementation do provide a
validating context as against the charge
that the later statute stands without any
indication to the agencies and officials of
legislative contours and contemplation.
The approaches and decisions
under the earlier laws are certainly not
“frozen” as guidelines for the present
law. Indeed an ordinary agency is not
precluded from modifying its policies,
see Greater Boston Television Corp. v.
FCC, 444 F.2d 841, 852 (D.C.Cir.1971).
An agency “may switch rather than
fight the lessons of experience.” New
Castle County Airport Comm’nv. CAB,
125 U.S.App.D.C. 268, 270, 371 F.2d 733,
735 (1966), cert. denied, 387 U.S. 930,
87 S.Ct. 2052, 18 L.Ed.2d 991 (1967).
The present administration is
entitled to a fresh approach. City of

tion program under the 1950 Act. The
Court held the 1950 Act isto be read with
reference to the Stabilization Act of
1942, as “the context in which Congress
enacted it.” 347 U.S. at 541, 74 S.Ct.
at 749.
The Defense Production Act of 1950,
Sept. 8, 1950, c. 932, 64 Stat. 798, con-
tained Title IV—Price and Wage Stabili-
zation. Section 402(b) specified as a
prerequisite to imposition of ceilings on
an individual material or service, but
provided that when ceilings have been
established on “a substantial part of all
sales at retail and materially affecting
the cost of living, the President (i) shall
impose ceilings on prices and services
generally, and (ii) shall stabilize wages,
salaries, and other compensation gen-
erally.”

Chicago v. FPC, 128 U.S.App.D.C. 107,
115-116, 385 F.2d 629, 637-638 (1967).
The fact that there are significant dif-
ferences between the inflationary prob-
lems of 1970 and the inflationary prob-
lems of 1942 and 1950 provides addition-
al reasons for differences in policies.
Notwithstanding the permissible differ-
ences from prior approaches the historic
context of government stablization mea-
sures provides a starting point, within
the broad contemplation of Congress,
that negatives a conclusion that the
whole program was set adrift without
any rudder.
An undeniably prominent feature of
the earlier stabilization programs was
the adoption thereunder of across-the-
board wage and price controls, typically
with “freeze” and “hold-the-line” ap-
proaches, subject to relaxation for hard-
ships and inequities under implementing
standards. There can be no doubt that
in its broad outlines the general freeze
ordered by the President conforms to
the legislative intention. Even a rudi-
mentary recourse to available legal ma-

terials readily permits a court to ascer-
tain at least to this extent the contours
of the legislative will and the conform-
ance of the Executive action to it.
Availability legislative
4. of stabiliza-
tion purpose from legislative history
The Union challenges the thesis
that the 1970 Act can be sustained by
reference to the earlier stabilization laws
and rulings thereunder, complaining that
unlike the earlier statutes the present
law is “shorthand legislation,” devoid of
any statement of policy or objectives, or
of conditions under which action is to be
taken, or findings of Congressional in­
tent.

The Act is obviously different in its
structure from the law upheld in Yakus,
which was replete with just such state-
ments of policy, objectives and findings.
The difference is largely one of drafting
style, ascribable perhaps to the circum-
stance that the 1942 law was proposed
749

by the Executive, and introduced on that
basis after scrutiny by the legislature’s
drafting staffs. This circumstance is
not immaterial — for power may come
on occasion to be granted more broadly
to one who seeks it not — but it can
hardly be decisive.
The Yakus opinion made reference to
these purposes of the 1942 law, 321 U.S.
at 420, 64 S.Ct. at 665:

to stabilize prices and to prevent spec-
ulative, unwarranted, and abnormal* in-
creases in prices and rents; * *
to assure that defense appropriations
are not dissipated by excessive prices;
to protect persons with relatively fixed
and limited incomes, consumers, wage
earners, investors, and persons depend-
ent on life insurance, annuities, and
pensions, from undue impairment of
their standard of living; to prevent
hardships* to* persons* engaged in busi-
ness, and to the Federal,
State, and local governments, which
would result from abnormal increases
in prices * * *.

While there are differences in circum-
stances and emphasis, the purposes re-
lied on in Yakus are largely overlapping
of the purposes inherent in the 1970
authority to “stabilize” prices and
wages — in particular the dominant pur-
pose of avoiding the impairment of the
standard of living of consumers, wage
earners and those on fixed incomes. It
is not without significance that Title II
of the Act of August 15, 1970, which is
identified in its short title as the Eco-
nomic Stabilization Act of 1970, is cap-
tioned: “Title II — Cost of Living Sta-
bilization.” The situation may be dia-
grammed as two intersecting circles with
a large overlapping sector in common.

The purposes of the 1970 law,
to a considerable extent inherent in the
very authority to “stabilize,” are set
forth more explicitly in the Report of
the House Committee on Banking and
Currency which inserted these provisions
into the legislative process. H.R.Rep.

750
No. 91-1330 19(hereafter cited as House
Report). We consider this Report as
of such importance for the present rul-
ing, that we append the pertinent ex-
cerpts as Annex C. Settled precedent
establishes beyond any doubt that com-
mittee reports may be considered in or-
der to ascertain the purpose of legisla-
tion 20.
The House Report states (at p. 10)
that the provisions were proposed so that
“the President will have all of the neces-
sary weapons needed to control infla-
tion.” And the Committee added:
No one can doubt that inflation is
still on a rampage in our economy.
The cost-of-living figures released on
July 22 indicated that prices have
risen in the first half of this year
at a 6 percent annual rate. Granted
that this rate of increase is insignifi-
cantly less than that experienced in the
first half of last year, this is in no
way provides any solace to the unem-
ployed, the aged, and others living
on fixed incomes, and the wage earner
who finds his wages continually eroded
by increases in the cost of living.
This same inflation is responsible for
the housing depression, the balance-of-
payments crisis and the current liquid-
ity squeeze.
Whether legislative purposes are to
be obtained from committee reports, or
are set forth in a separate section of
the text of the law, is largely a matter
of drafting style. Plainly the 1970 leg-
islative purpose set forth in the House
Report does not differ in material degree
from the statement of legislative pur-
pose in the 1942 legislation upheld in
Yakus. This purpose was reiterated in
debate on the 1970,Act.

19. This report accompanied H.R. 17880,
which was passed by the House. Then
the provisions in Title II, Cost-of-Living
Stabilization, were added by the House to
S. 3302, and were accepted by the Con-
ference Committee, the House and the
Senate.
20. United States v. International Union,
UAW-CIO, 352 U.S. 567, 585, 77 S.Ct.
5. Delegation to President of “timing”
of direct controls supported by legisla-
tive conclusions that indirect controls
were insufficient medicine for “cost-
push” inflation and that “stand-by”permitau-
thority was changenecessaryprogramto the
President to his inflationaryandto
use a freeze as a check on
psychology
We see no merit in the con­
tention that the Act is constitutionally
defective because the timing of the im­
position of controls was delegated to the
President.
The House Report clarifies that this
delegation was not an abdication by Con-
gress, but the product of a reasoned anal-
ysis that only such delegation as to
timing would further the legislative pur-
pose of stabilization. It states that the
Act “reflects a sincere congressional will-
ingness to do its part— and to share the
consequences— in a meaningful attack on
its inflation,” and that the stabilizing au-
thority, together with the December 1969
law granting authority over credit for
the purpose of preventing or controlling
inflation 21,
will, in the opinion of your committee,
provide the President with allinflation,ofthe
tools necessary to control
while at the same time providing for
healthy economic growth. In this way
we will not need to rely exclusively
placeonfiscaland monetary actions which
segmentsan inordinate burden on those
of our economy and society
least able to bear them.
Congress was acting in a setting where
all were agreed on the need to control
inflation but opinion was sharply divided
on the optimum measures for the Gov-
ernment to use. As of 1970, the Presi-

529, 1 L.Ed.2d 563 (1957) ; Cole v.
Young, 351 U.S. 536, 548, 76 S.Ct. 861,
100 L.Ed. 1396 (1956) ; Pan American
World Airways v. CAB, 380 F.2d 770,
779 (2d Cir. 1967) ; Pridemark, Inc. v.
Commissioner, 345 F.2d 35, 41 (4th Cir.
1965).
21. P.L. 91-151, 12 U.S.C. § 1904.

dent was heeding the counsel of that
substantial body of thought which ad-
vocatedetarymeasures,concentrationonfiscal and mon-
the so-calledadvocatingindire
controls. Others were an
“incomes policy,” with readiness to re-
sort to direct controls, on the ground
that wage-cost-price increases were so
embedded in the structure of private de-
cision-making that fiscal and monetary
programs alone could not be successful
in checking inflation without conse-
quences of unemployment and recession
that could not be tolerated.
The issue whether the delegation be-
fore us is excessive must be considered
in the light of the unique situation, with
the President not in accord with the
conclusion of Congress as to the need or
desirability of the power entrusted to
him22. Thus the Speaker, supporting
the law, put it that the President and
his advisers “are prescribing the wrong
medicine for the particular inflationary
virus now affecting the Nation23,” that
restrictive fiscal and monetary policies
are appropriate for combating tradition-
al “demand-pull inflation” but the coun-
try was now beset by “cost-push infla-

22. See Mr. Widnall, 116 Cong.Rec. H
7507, July 31, 1970, opposing the bill,
quoting from President Nixon’s speech
to the Nation on June 17, 1970, on the
economy “I will not take this Nation
down the road of wage and price con-
trols.”

23. Speaker Albert’s statement is at 116
Cong.Rec. p. H7508, July 31, 1970:
Last year, for the first time in a
decade, the gross national product failed
to grow. Industry is operating sub-
stantially below capacity. Consumer
confidence has experienced a sharp de-
terioration. Mr. Chairman, this Nation
is now in the grips of a serious re-
cession.
Mr. Chairman, the guilty culprit is
undoubtedly the traditional monetary
and fiscal policies being employed by
this administration in its futile and mis-
guided efforts to combat inflation. The
ill-advised medicine of a choking tight
money policy has produced record high
interest rates. The administration’s
fiscal objectives have been characterized
by all the social breadth of a book-
751
tion” for which direct controls were
needed. It is not our place to review the
merits of these differences. But the
ct physician-virus metaphor is revealing.
Viewing the President as a physician in
charge, Congress could advise but not
mandate his diagnosis. It sought in the
national interest to have the right rem-
edy available on a standby basis, if the
President should wish to adopt that pre-
scription, following his further reflection
and taking into account future develop-
ments and experience.
We cannot say that this delegation was
unreasoned, or a mere abdication to the
President to doauthoritywhateverhe willed.CongressIt
conferred an that
concluded, with reasons, had a substan-
tial likelihood of being required.
Undergirding the need for delegation
on timing was the Congressional ac-
ceptance of the recommendation of many
economists, labor leaders, the AFL-CIO,
mayors of large cities and others, who
“called on the Congress to provide dis-
cretionary standby authority to the Pres-
ident to impose wage, price, rent, and
salary controls to combat and break the
back of inflation and the inflationary

keeper and the human compassion of an
Ebenezer Scrooge. All efforts by this
Congress to increase public investment
in housing, health, education, and anti-
pollution, are denounced from the White
House and stoutly resisted by its spokes-
men in the Congress as fiscal irresponsi-
bility. Vetoes and threats of vetoes of
our efforts to improve the quality of life
in this Nation are the order of the day.
Mr. Chairman, it is abundantly clear
that President Nixon and his economic
advisers are prescribing the wrong medi-
cine for the particular inflationary virus
now affecting the Nation. Classical re-
strictive fiscal and monetary policies
certainly have a proper role to play in
combating traditional “demand-pull” in-
flation. Such demand-pull inflation is
invariably the result of shortages in
manpower and productive capacity. We
possess neither today. Unemployment
has risen during the past year and it is
conceded by the administration spokes-
men that it will increase further during
1970. We likewise possess an abund-
ance of unused industrial capacity.

752
psychology which pervades our thinking
and our economy.” House Report, p. 9.
The problem of “inflationary psychol-
ogy” to which the Committee referred
supports the Congressional delegation on
timing to the President. The success
and reasonableness of government pro-
grams depends in crucial degree on their
psychologicalingredient. It was the con-
templation of Congress that a pervasive
and likely dramatic general control mea-
sure would be a convincing earnest of
the breadth and depth of the commit-
ment of the Government, and provide im-
petus to the Government’s call to the
people to endure the disappointments
and grievances that are inevitable with
controls of such magnitude. Congress
was not required to put such constraints
on the timing of the exercise of power
as to jeopardize the underlying objec-
tives.
Finally the House Report takes cog­
nizance, in support of delegation of
“timing” to the President, that Congress
might not be in session when action was
requisite.24

The constitutional doctrine
prohibitingpowerundue delegation of legisla­
tive takes account of the prac­
ticalities and necessities of the public
interest. The decisions permitting dele­
gation, reviewed' in part in our earlier
discussion, relate to a number and varie­
ty of concrete instances. Their mean­
ingful message requires them to be tak­
en broadly. The national Government
has greatthepower to do what is needful for
the national purposes that identify
this country’s adjustments to change

24. While the point isexplicitly made in the
context that Congress might not be in ses-
sion when controls should be terminated
(House Report x). 11), there is obvious
application to justify a delegation of tim-
ing of institution of controls.
25. Cf. 116 Cong.Rec. H. 7504, July 31,
1970, Mr. Patman, in charge of the bill:
“As the Chairman of the Committee on
Rules said, our country can be destroyed
by inflation.”
26. E. g., Mr. Gross, 116 Cong.Rec. H.
7504, July 31, 1970:
and ultimately survival.25 The legisla­
ture may delegate powers that cannot
meaningfully be retained or constrained.
Turning to present context, the Consti­
tution did not forbid a Congress con­
cerned with controlling inflation from
coping with escalating expectations by
calling on the shock of a general Presi­
dential freeze to check the inflationary
psychology.
6. Validity of delegation and of freeze
not negatived by failure to require dec-
claration of emergency, or by lack of sud-r
den or sharp price movement in 1971
Consideration of delegation of timing
leads us into offshoot questions and corol-
lary propositions.

a. The Union puts it that the
delegation was excessively broad because
there was no requirement that the Presi­
dent declare some kind of emergency be­
fore invoking these powers. The same
point was made in debate by Congress­
men opposed to the bill.26 While the
point is not without materiality it is not
decisive. On the matter at issue, impo­
sition of general controls, emergency is
instinct in the situation. Congress may
reasonably have feared that the Nation
would have fared worse if the inflation­
ary problem were dramatized by some
further formal declaration of emergen­
cy, especially in view of the ambiguous
situation where this kind of domestic
emergency might coexist with a lessen­
ing of international stresses and strains.
Since 1950 the Nation has been under a
formal declaration of emergency which
was initially accompanied by stabilization
con­ trols.27 The conditions of crisis

“I have read through titleII backward
and forward and I can find no place,
no point in title II of this bill where
there is even the requirement on the
President that he declare any kind of
emergency, either war emergency or
domestic emergency, as a preliminary to
the invocation of these powers that
here would be granted to him.”
27. Proclamation No. 2914, 15 F.R. 9029
(Dec. 19, 1950).

have witnessed many an ebb and flow
since 1950, and significant changes in
characteristics. But the courts cannot
inject a constitutional requirement of a
declaration calibrating the scale of
emergency warranting particular ac-
tions. Congress may also have been
fearful lest a refined declaration of
emergency for one purpose have unin-
tended and undesired carryover to quite
different and unvisualized areas.
b. The Union goes on to say
that there was no emergency in fact, that
the President himself, in his message of
August 15, points out that the rate of
inflation had declined from 6% to 4%
per annum. It may be that the Presi­
dent concluded that the kind of fiscal and
monetary controls that had permitted a
reduction in the rate of inflation en­
tailed consequences that would become
so grievous, if relied on exclusively in
the future, as to jeopardize the public
interest. It may be that he concluded
that fiscal and monetary controls alone
could not arrive at the kind of reduction
in rate of inflation, to a level under 4%
or even 3%, that was necessary to offset
the inflationary psychology that plagued
the Nation. These are not matters for
us to determine. It suffices that there
are such possibilities, and that this court

28. Senator Packwood proposed an amend-
ment whereby the authority of the Presi-
dent to impose general controls be depend-
ent on a concurrent resolution of Con-
gress that this was required by the public
interest. 117 Cong.Rec. p. S 6135, May
3, 1971. He argued in debate, inter alia
(p. S 6136) : “Inflation is not an emer-
gency, if by an emergency we mean some
unexpected happening occurring immedi-
ately.” Senator Proxmire responded (p. S
6136) :
Although I oppose the amendment, I
think there is much to be said for a re-
luctance to give the President the kind
of authority which would give him pow-
er to impose wage and price controls.
I recall that when Mr. Burns ap-
peared before the Joint Economic Com-
mittee, he said he would give the Presi-
dent this authority for 2 weeks. The
administration is asking for the author-
ity for 2 years, and I have been so con-
cerned about it that that is one of the
753
cannot say that the President’s message
either negatived any possible rational
basis for his order, or offset the pre-
sumption of validity to which that order
is entitled.
c. The need felt by Congress to dele-
gate broadly to the President is not un-
dercut by the circumstance that the coun-
try was not experiencing and Congress
did not contemplate a sudden or dramatic
price rise, such as sometimes accompa-
nies a war or shooting emergency, but
only a “creeping” inflation. Continuing
the medical analogy a cost-push infla-
tion is no less malignant than a demand-
pull inflation. On the issue of delega-
tion, Congress had reason to authorize
the President to begin prompt treatment
with direct controls whenever he conclud-
ed this was the proper course and re-
gardless of the prior rate of spread of
the disease. The matter was reconsid-
ered in debate on the occasion of the
1971 extension, when some legislators
argued that Congress should abandon a
“Gulf of Tonkin” approach to the prob-
lem that delegated broadly to the Presi-
dent. Other legislators reasoned in re-
sponse that the “creeping” nature of in-
flation required a broad delegation to the
President to precipitate an effective
counter-action.28 We have no basis or

reasons why I have limited the present
authority to 6 months.
If we provide that before wage and
price controls can be imposed, it is
necessary to introduce a resolution to
do so to have it referred to committee,
to have hearings on it, to discuss it in
the hearings, then to bring it out on the
floor and debate on the floor that kind
of resolution, we can imagine the effect
that this could have on the country.
After all, if one is a businessman
or the head of a labor union and antici-
pates that Congress is about to impose
wage and price controls, there is every
reason why one might proceed to try
to push up his price or wages as rapid-
ly as possible. It can be argued that
this can be made retroactive. That
creates great disruption in the country.
It is difficult for business and labor
unions to know what the future may
bring.
ife i(t 41 Ht >f:

754

warrant for holding that what purported
to be a reasoned assignment of authority
was only an abdication of responsibility.
7. Significance of international factors
juncture re­
This is a suitable to
fer to the undoubted and substantial sig­
nificance of the interrelation between the
domestic wage and price controls and the
actions taken by the President on Au­
gust 15, 1971, in the field of interna­
tional trade and monetary adjustments.
The President’s message identifies the
existence of such an interrelation though
not its exact nature. The House Re­
port’s recount of legislative policy in­
cludes its recital that the current infla­
tion malady is significantly responsible
for the balance-of-payments crisis and
liquidity squeeze. This was a 1970 prob­
lem and a legislative objective not known
at the time of the 1942 and 1950 legisla­
tion. The consequence for international
trade, liquidity and monetary relation­
ships, enhances the range of power Con­
gress may permissibly delegate to the
President. United States v. Curtiss-­
Wright Export Corp., 299 U.S. 304, 57
S.Ct. 216, 81 L.Ed. 255 (1936); Zemel
v. Rusk, 381 U.S. 1, 17, 85 S.Ct. 1271,
14 L.Ed.2d 179 (1965). And it par­
ticularly substantiates the legitimacy of
delegating to the President the authority
as to the timing for the blending of ac­
tions with international consequences.
8. Limited duration of statute
It is also material, though not
dispositive, to note the limited time

Because of the very nature of infla-
tion —it creeps up and drops back and
goes up —I think it is important that
the decision be made very swiftly and
be made by the President of the United
States on the basis of the best advice
he can get and not on the basis of a
long, extended debate in Congress.
29. Cf. Nielsen v. Sec’y of the Treasury,
137 U.S.App.D.C. 345, 355, 424 F.2d
833, 843 (1970). The Court has referred
to the extensions of duration of stabiliza­
tion measures as signifying awareness by
Congress of at least major administrative
developments, see Allen v. Grand Cent.
Aircraft Co., supra, 347 U.S. at 542, 544-­
545, 549, 74 S.Ct. 745. The delegation
frame established by Congress for the
stabilization authority delegated to the
President.29 The Act as enacted on Au-
gust 15, 1970 expired February 28, 1971,
establishing a lifespan of about six
months. Two subsequent extensions pro-
vided even shorter durations.30 When
the current expiration date of April 30,
1972, was set on May 18, 1971, Congress
rejected the administration request for a
two-year extension. Thus, in the words
of the Government’s memorandum, Con-
gress established a “close control.” It
conjoined flexibility in the President to
act promptly with an obligation in Con-
gress to undertake an affirmative re-
view without prolonged delay, without
the option of acquiescence by inaction.

9. Statute not subject to attack as dele-
gating authority to be unfair and in-
equitable; law contains standard of
broad fairness and avoidance of gross
inequity
However Congress cannot dele­
gate unlimited authority to the Execu­
tive over prices and wages even for a pe­
riod limited to say, the 8-9 months be­
tween the President’s Order of August
15, 1971, and the April 30, 1972 expira­
tion date.
The Union says that during this period
the President has been given a “blank
check” for internal affairs which is in-
tolerable in our constitutional system.
The Union notes that the order exempted
from controls the prices charged for raw
agricultural products without statutory

to a board of compulsory arbitration pow­
er over a major railway labor dispute
was limited to a two-year period, though
this feature was not referred to in the de­
cision upholding constitutionality. Broth­
erhood of Loco. Fire & Eng. v. Chicago,
B. & Q. R. Co., 225 F.Supp. 11 (D.D.C.),
aff’d, 118 U.S.App.D.C. 100, 331 F.2d
1020, cert. denied, 377 U.S. 918, 84 S.Ct.
1181, 12 L.Ed.2d 187 (1964).
30. An amendment passed Dec. 17, 1970, set
an expiration date of March 31, 1971, —a
lifespan of three and one-half months.
A last-minute amendment on March 31,
1971, granted an additional two months
standby authority, to expire on May 31,
1971.

authority for the exemption. It claims
that the failure of Congress to require,
as in the 1942 and 1950 legislation that
ongoing regulations be “fair and equita-
ble” is tantamount to a delegation to the
President of the power to be unfair and
inequitable. The Union complains that
there was a failure to provide a system
for testing these orders, administrative-
ly and by judicial review, as in the earlier
legislation.
The net result, charges the Union, is
a legislative initiation of control by bare
executive fiat, with completely unlimited
authority put at the disposal of the
President.
This is a formidable fusillade, deva-
stating verbally and not without force
analytically. When the smoke clears away,
however, we conclude that the Rule of
Law has been beleaguered but not breach-
ed.
We begin with the observation that we
cannot stand on the analysis put to us by
the Government. The Government does
say, correctly, that the doors of the courts

31. See e. g.,Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S.
356, at 366-370, 6 S.Ct. 1064,; at 1069-­
1071, 30 L.Ed. 220 (1886)
“They [the ordinance regulating laun-
dries] seem intended to confer, and ac-
tually do confer, not a discretion to be ex-
ercised upon a consideration of the cir-
cumstances of each case, but a naked
and arbitrary power to give or withhold
consent, not only as to places, but as to
persons; so that, ifeveryanapplicantwayfor such
consent, being in a competent
and qualified person, and having com-
plied with every reasonable condition de-
manded by any public interest, should,
failing to obtain the requisite consent of
the supervisors to the prosecution of his
business, apply for redress by the judicial
process of mandamus to require the su-
pervisors to consider and act upon his
case, it would be a sufficient answer for
them to say that the law had conferred
upon them authority to withhold their
assent, without reason and without re-
sponsibility. The power given to them is
not confided to their discretion in the legal
sense of that term, but is granted to their
mere will. It is purely arbitrary, and
acknowledges* * neither* guidance nor re-
straint.
755

remain open. But the question is, wheth-
er the courts can appraise the claim that
the stabilization actions do not conform
to the legislative will, measured by an in-
telligible standard If the courts are
open only nominally, they would enhance
rather than inhibit executive absolutism.
In the last analysis Government coun-
sel seem to meet these contentions by re-
lying on, and reiterating, the limited
duration of the President’s powers.
That is material, as we have noted, but
it is not itself a sufficient answer to the
Union’s contentions.
If the Act gives the President
authority to be unfair and inequitable,
as the Union claims, this legislative ves­
sel may indeed founder on a constitution­
al rock.31 But we do not reach this con­
stitutional issue because we do not think
the Act can be given the extremist in­
terpretation offered by the Union.
We take this view not only be­
cause of the doctrine that statutes are to
be construed so as to avoid serious con­
stitutional questions,32 but more directly

“When we consider the nature and the
theory of our institutions of government,
the principles upon which they are sup-
posed to rest, and review the history of
their development, we are constrained to
conclude that they do not mean to leave
room for the play and action of purely per-
sonal and arbitrary power. Sovereignty
itself is, of course, not subject to law, for
it is the author and source of law; but
in our system, while sovereign powers
are delegated to the agencies of govern-
ment, sovereignty itself remains with the
people, by whom and for whom all govern-
ment exists and acts. * * * [T]he
very idea that one man may be com-
pelled to hold his life, or the means of
living, or any material right essential to
the enjoyment of life, at the mere will of
another, seems to be intolerable in any
country where freedom prevails, as being
the essence of slavery itself.”

32. For the general doctrine see e. g., United
States v. Rumely, 345 U.S. 41, 45, 73
S.Ct. 543, 97 L.Ed. 770 (1953) and
cases cited.
There is abundant precedent for applica-
tion of this doctrine to avoid a conclusion
that a statute vests unfettered discretion
in the Executive.

756

because we do not think it can sensibly
or fairly be said that this extremist ap-
proach was what was intended by the
legislature. As we have already shown
there is no lack of specificity in the
constitutional sense in the standards of
the Act for the initiation of controls, ei-
ther in particular industries or sectors
the economy, or in the general wage price
freeze.
The problem that now concerns us is
whether the Act has sufficient specificity
to avoid the constitutional condemnation,
of excessive “blank check” authority to
the President, as to the period following
the initial general price-wage freeze. The
legislative history records the hope of
the House Committee that an initial
freeze for two or three months would

In the Japanese Immigrant Case, 189
U.S. 86, 23 S.Ct. 611, 47 L.Ed. 721,
(1903) Justice Harlan said (p. 101, 23
S.Ct. p. 615) :
The words here used do not require an
interpretation that would invest execu-
tive or administrative officers with the
absolute, arbitrary power implied in the
contention of the appellant.
In Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 78
S.Ct. 1113, 2 L.Ed.2d 1204 (1958), the
Court said at 128-130, 78 S.Ct. at 1119-
1120:
“We, therefore, hesitate to impute to
Congress, when in 1952 it made a pass-
port necessary for foreign travel and
left its issuance to the discretion of
the Secretary of State, a purpose to give
him unbridled discretion to grant or
withhold a passport from a citizen for
any substantive reason he may choose.
* * * We would be faced with im-
portant constitutional questions were
we to hold that Congress * * *
had given the Secretary authority to
withhold passports to citizens because
of their beliefs or associations. Con-
gress has made no such provision in ex-
plicit terms; and absent one, the Secre-
tary may not employ that standard to
restrict the citizens’ right of free move-
ment.”
Only last year the Court said in Gut­
knecht v. United States, 396 U.S. 295,
306-307, 90 S.Ct. 506, 511, 24 L.Ed.2d
532 (1970):
The power under the [Selective Serv-
ice] regulations to declare a registrant
“delinquent” has no statutory standard
or even guidelines. The power is exer-
suffice to give a handle to control infla-
tion, and could be followed by a termina-
tion of controls.33 But the law as ex-
tended in 1971 permitted controls for a
period of some 11 months. While the
Act contemplated the issuance of a gen-
eral freeze it did not mandate that con-
trols once begun as a general freeze must
endure in the same vein. The House Re-
port noted that they might be removed
“in part.” Members of the committee
contemplated possible exceptions as well
as “equity provisions.” 34 This country’s
experience with its prior stabilization
programs fairly establishes as the con-
templation of Congress that controls un-
der the Act need not be continued in a
perpetuation of the general freeze be-
yond a temporary opening period. A

cised entirely at the discretion of the
local board. It is a broad, roving au-
thority, a type of administrative ab-
solutism not congenial***to our law-mak-
ing traditions. We search the
Act in vain for any clues that Con-
gress desired the Act to have punitive
sanctions apart from the criminal prose-
cutions specifically authorized. Nor do
we read it as granting personal privi-
leges that may be forfeited for trans-
gressions that affront the local board.
If federal or state laws are violated
by registrants, they can be prosecuted.
If induction is to be substituted for
these prosecutions, a vast rewriting of
the Act is needed. Standards would
be needed by which the legality of a
declaration of “delinquency” could be
judged.
33. See e. g., House Report at p. 9 “It is
envisaged that the freeze, to be effective
in getting a handle on inflation, would
need to be enforced for only 2 or 3
months.” See also p. 11 “[0]ne could
easily envision the possibility that, once
having imposed wage-price-salary-rent
freezes, a few months hence it would be
necessary to remove them in whole or in
part.” See also Congressman Reuss, 116
Cong.Rec. H. 7512,July 31, 1970, referring
to the 2-3 month freeze as the time with-
in which the administrationmanagementcould“worknon-
out with labor and a
inflationary incomes policy to hold the
line over the next difficult year or two.”
Cong.Rec. (July
34.31,Mr.1970).Reuss,116 H. 7512

freeze is always arbitrary to some extent,
and while such arbitrarinessshort-rangecanbe sus-
tained for a relatively initial
period its prolongation in a country as
vast as ours, with problems so various,
runs the risk of betraying the concept
of responsible government.
We do not think it can be said that
the possibility of controls beyond the ini-
tial freeze was left without any stand-
ard other than the President’s unfettered
discretion, including the discretion to be
unfair and inequitable. This is not a
case where Congress indicated an inten-
tion to leave the matter wholly to the
discretion of the President without any
possibility of judicial review. The ulti-
mate standard for follow-on controls re-
placing the freeze is a standard of fair-
ness and equity. This standard of re-
moval of “gross inequities” is voiced as

35. On April 27, 1942, President Roosevelt
asked Congress and the Nation to carry
out a 7-point stabilization program as
“our present national economic policy.”
See H.Doc. 716, 77th Congress 2d Sess.,
88 Cong.Rec. 3689. Point 3 stated: “To
keep the cost of living from spiraling
upward, we must stabilize the remunera-
tion received by individuals for their
work.” He stated that legislation was
not required under then prevailing circum-
stances, noting that labor had voluntarily
given up the right to strike during the
war and that existing contracts would be
carried out to expiration date. In amplifi-
cation of point 3, the President stated:
I believe that stabilizing the cost of liv-
ing will mean that wages in general
can and* should** be kept at existing
scales. [A]ll stabilization or
adjustment of wages will be settled by
the War Labor Board machinery which
has been generally accepted by indus-
try and labor* *for*the settlement of all
disputes. The existing ma-
chinery for labor disputes will, of
course, continue to give due considera-
tion to inequalities and the elimination
of substandards of living.
On July 16, 1942 the National War
Labor Board issued its decision in the
Little Steel Case. In Re Bethlehem Steel
Corp. et al., No. 2748-D et al. (1 WLR
325). The Board applied the yardstick of
a “stabilizationwagefactor” limiting the avail-
Januaryable1, increases to 15% above the
living1941,level, the increase in the
cost of index between that date
757
an authority of the President in § 202 of
the Act. See also House Report (p. 9).
We think there is fairly implicit in the
Act the duty to take whatever action is
required in the interest of broad fair-
ness and avoidance of gross inequity, al-
though presumably his range of discre-
tion means there may be inequities that
a President may remove that he is not
compelledby law to remove.
This conclusion is supported by con-
stitutional considerations and historic
context. The 1942 statute on prices
specifically articulated the “generally
fair and equitable” standard. But the
broad equity standard is inherent in a
stabilization program. It was incorpo-
rated into the 1942 wage control meas-
ures providing for stabilization of wages
and salaries.35 Fairness and equity are
also furthered by the requirement (see

and the President’s 7-point program.
The Union had requested a $1 per day
increase above the wages set in April
1941 to compensate for the 13% rise in
the costyardstickoflivingindexsince April 1941.
The of January 1, 1941 meant
that in view of the increase established in
April 1941 (of about 11%) there could
only be an additional 2.8% increase not
the 13% sought by the Union.
The Board granted an additional slight
adjustment because of the “peculiar
* * * time equities of the steelwork­
ers,” the majority opinion, written by
Dr. George W. Taylor, Vice-Chairman,
saying: “A mechanical and a rigid ap­
plication of the stabilization program to
this long-pending case” would lead to “a
deep sense of injustice” in the steelwork­
ers, arising out of the change in rules, and
would indicate an arbitrariness that would
“offend the American people’ssense of fair
play.”
Chairman Davis summarized the ma-
jority opinion as applying yardsticks to
wage stabilization that were “fair and
equitable and at the same time sufficient
to prevent the cost of living from spiraling
upward because of wage adjustments. We
think they lead to a ‘terminal’ for the
tragic race between wages and prices.”
(Emphasis added.) The Little Steel
“formula” was later adopted by the Board
when Congress passed the Stabilization
Act of October 2, 1942. A succinct ac-
count of the foregoing appears in H.
Stein, Public Administration and Policy
Development 784 ff. (1952).

758
point 10) that the Executive develop im-
plementing standards, with deliberate cri-
teria replacing the fortuities of a freeze.
To obviate any possible misun­
derstanding we refer to the general prin­
ciple under which the requirement of
fairness takes on content in the light of
what is feasible. The law does not con­
template what is manifestly impractica­
ble, or suppose that all problems are to
be taken care of at once. And so it has
been held that broad emergency price
control measures need not entitle each
particular seller to consideration of the
equity of his position, for such an obli­
gation would impose an administrative
impracticability that would defeat the
very purpose of the Act. Bowles v. Wil­
lingham, 321 U.S. 503, 64 S.Ct. 641, 88
L.Ed. 892 (1944).
In other contexts when agencies
have been given enormous regulatory
tasks, the courts have interpreted the
underlying statutes to take account of
what is feasible. Perhaps the outstand-
ing opinion along these lines is Permian
Basin Area Rate Cases, 390 U.S. 747, 88
S.Ct. 1344, 20 L.Ed.2d 312 (1968), where
the Court upheld agency action exercis-
ing an authority to provide a moratorium
on requests for relief (pp. 777-781, 88
S.Ct. 1344), granting exemptions not spe-
cifically voiced in the statute (pp. 785-
787, 88 S.Ct. 1344), deferring certain is-
sues and guidelines for later considera-
tion (p. 788, 88 S.Ct. 1344), focusing first
on aggregate problems and moving on in
the light of experience to more refined
consideration of problems of need or eq-
uity (pp. 772, 822, 88 S.Ct. p. 1344).
Similarly in Wisconsin v. Federal Power
Commission, 373 U.S. 294, 313-314, 83
S.Ct. 1266, 1277, 10 L.Ed.2d 357
(1963), the Court took pains to point out
that ordinarily, at least, a court cannot

The Stabilization Act of October 2,
1942, directed the President “to issue a
general order stabilizing prices, wages and
salaries, affecting the cost of living” with
authority to make adjustments “to the ex-
tent that he finds necessary to aid in the
effective prosecution of the war or to cor-
rect gross inequities.” 56 Stat. 765.
say that an agency makes an error of
law “in deciding how best to allocate its
resources” and that the courts will not
deprive the agencies of “the flexibility
[they] must have at this still formative** *
period in a difficult area of
regulation.”
It is not our purpose or function at
this time to define the contours of the
standard of broad fairness and avoid-
ance of gross inequity. That would be
appropriate if the taking or omission of
specific action were challenged. But we
reiterate that we cannot accept the con-
tention of the Government that the court
must pass on the constitutionality of the
Act without any conception of its con-
tent. We take the intermediate course
and rule that our judgment has two
parts: first, that the statute does at
least contain a standard of broad fair-
ness and avoiding gross inequity, — leav-
ing to the future the implementation of
that standard; second, that this statute
is not unconstitutional as an excessive
delegation of power by the legislature
to the executive for the limited term of
months contemplated by Congress to fol-
low the initiating general freeze.
10. Need for ongoing administrative
standards as avoiding undue breadth of
executive authority

Another feature that blunts the
“blank check” rhetoric is the requirement
that any action taken by the Executive
under the law, subsequent to the freeze,
must be in accordance with further
standards as developed by the Executive.
This requirement, inherent in the Rule
of Law and implicit in the Act, means
that however broad the discretion of the
Executive at the outset, the standards
once developed limit the latitude of sub­
sequent executive action.

That the broad and well known pro-
grams for administration of stabilization
measures may be taken, especially in view
of the annual extensions (see note 29), as
interpretations congruent with Congres-
sional contemplation, see Allen v. Grand
Cent. Aircraft Co., supra, 347 U.S. at
544-545, 74 S.Ct. at 745.

The importance in present context of
this self-limiting aspect of executive and
agency discretion is brought out in
Yakus v. United States, supra. After
noting that the Constitution does not de-
mand the impossible, that the essentials
of the legislative function are preserved
with a determination of legislative policy,
Chief Justice Stone continues:
It is no objection that the determina-
tion of facts and the inferences to be
drawn from them in the light of the
statutory standards and declaration of
policy call for the exercise of judg-
ment, and for the formulation of sub-
sidiary administrative policy within
the prescribed statutory framework.36
The crucial paragraph of the opinion
specifically relies on the reasoning of
Executive administration as helping to
supply the requisite specificity and pre-
cision :
[T]he standards prescribed by the
present Act, with the aid of the “state-
ment of the considerations” required
to be made by the Administrator, are
sufficiently definite and precise to en-
able Congress, the Courts and the pub-
lic to ascertain whether the Adminis-
trator, in fixing the designated prices,
has conformed to those standards.
[Citation] Hence we are unable to
find in them an unauthorized delega-
tion of legislative power.37
The requirement of subsidiary admin-
istrative policy, enabling Congress, the
courts and the public to assess the Ex-
ecutive’s adherence to the ultimate legis-
lative standard, is in furtherance of the
purpose of the constitutional objective
of accountability. This 1970 Act gives
broadest latitude to the Executive. Cer-
tainly there is no requirement of formal
findings. But there is an on-going re-
quirement of intelligible administrative
policy that is corollary to and implement-
ing of the legislature’s ultimate standard
and objective. This requirement is un-
derscored by the consideration that the

36. 321 U.S. at 425, 64 S.Ct. at 667.
37. 321 U.S. at 426, 64 S.Ct. at 668.
759
exercise of wide discretion will proba-
bly call for “imaginative interpretation,”
leaving the courts to see whether the
executive, using its experience, “has fair-
ly exercised its discretion within the
vaguish, penumbral bounds” of the broad
statutory standard. F. C. C. v. RCA
Communications, Inc., 346 U.S. 86, 90-
91, 73 S.Ct. 998, 1002, 97 L.Ed. 1470
(1953).
In view of the administration of the
prior two stabilization programs38 the
Government cannot sensibly contend that
the requirement of development of ad-
ministrative standards is unattainable or
would reduce to a futility the legislative
objective of controlling inflation.
11. Applicability of Administrative Pro-
cedure Act provisions on administrative
rule-making and judicial review
The claim of undue delegation of legis-
lative power broadly raises the challenge
of undue power in the Executive and thus
naturally involves consideration of the
interrelated questions of the availability
of appropriate restraints through provi-
sions for administrative procedure and
judicial review. These components of
fairness are themselves elements of statu-
tory and constitutional rights but it is
appropriate to discuss them in present
context because they bear on the issue
whether there has been undue delegation
to the Executive.
The safeguarding of meaning­
ful judicial review is one of the primary
functions of the doctrine prohibiting un­
due delegation of legislative powers.
That this element of the doctrine, which
was noted in Yakus, has current vitality
is brought out by the observation of
Justice Harlan in Arizona v. California,
373 U.S. 546, 626, 83 S.Ct. 1468, 1511, 10
L.Ed.2d 542 (1963):

[The doctrine] prevents judicial re-
view from becoming merely an exer-
cise at large by providing the courts
with some measure against which to

38. See text to fn. 17, above.

760
judge the official action that has been
challenged.
The Government concedes and
we agree that the Executive’s actions
under the 1970 Act are not immune from
judicial review. There are occasions
when Congress has so committed mat­
ters to executive discretion as to avoid
judicial review or to remove judicial re­
view for error of law, including abuse
of discretion, restricting it to the narrow
function of correcting flagrant disregard
of a clear-cut legislative mandate. These
occasions are, however, the rare excep­
tion 39arising only in such fields as for­
eign affairs and national defense,40 or
where Congress has expressly or implied­
ly directed that the Executive proceed
without statement of reasons because the
functioning must rest on confidence or
be conducted with extraordinary expedit­
ion,41 or where the legislature manifests
an intent to avoid review in order to
further its objective, as where a failure
to exercise discretion to exempt is made
non-reviewable in furtherance of the ob­
jective of narrow exemptions.42
The Government’s position rests on
the proposition that since the Act pro-
vides for enforcement either by way of
fine (§ 204), or by way of injunction re-
straining violations (§ 205), and the per-
son charged with violation is able to ob-
tain judicial review by inserting a de-
fense to either type of enforcement pro-
ceeding, this provides ample judicial re-
view for constitutional purposes.
We need not consider whether under
conditions of modern life the Constitu-
tion permits a restriction to enforce-
ment proceedings of judicial review of
Executive discretion as broad in range
and significant in impact as that provid-
ed by this law, requiring citizens with
substantial doubts concerning the validi-
ty of the exercise of such broad discre-

39. See Overton Park v. Volpe, 401 U.S.
402, 91 S.Ct. 814, 28 L.Ed.2d 136 (1971).
40. Curran v. Laird, 136 U.S.App.D.C.
280, 420 F.2d 122 (en banc, 1969).
41. City of Lafayette v. SEC, D.C.Cir.,
454 F.2d 941 (1971) ; Int’l Ass’n of
tion to run the risk of criminal proceed-
ings. Compare Ex parte Young, 209
U.S. 123, 28 S.Ct. 441, 52 L.Ed. 714
(1908).
It is our conclusion that in addi­
tion to the judicial reviews noted by the
Government, challenges may be made un­
der the provisions for judicial review in
the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.
C. §§ 701-706. These provisions contem­
plate an action for declaratory judgment
or injunction, assuming pertinent re­
quirements for these forms of action are
met, as well as a defense in civil or crim­
inal proceedings, see 5 U.S.C. § 703. They
provide that a person suffering legal
wrong because of agency action is enti­
tled to review thereof, 5 U.S.C. § 702.
Judicial review is provided for final agen­
cy action for which there is no other
adequate remedy in court, 5 U.S.C. § 704.
When the impact of regula­
tions is direct and immediate, so that the
controversy is “ripe” for judicial resolu­
tion, these provisions of 5 U.S.C. §§ 701-­
706, permit pre-enforcement judicial re­
view. There is a basic presumption of
judicial review. The courts restrict ac­
cess to judicial review only upon a show­
ing of clear and convincing evidence of
a contrary legislative intent. Abbott
Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136,
140-141, 87 S.Ct. 1507, 18 L.Ed.2d 681
(1967).
Pre-enforcement judicial review
may be withheld when regulations do not
have an immediate impact on the com­
plainant and only minimal adverse con­
sequences will be involved if the regula­
tion is challenged in an enforcement pro­
ceeding. Toilet Goods Ass’n v. Gardner,
387 U.S. 158, 164-166, 87 S.Ct. 1520, 18
L.Ed.2d 697 (1967).
We have no occasion to expatiate on
these familiar provisions and principles
for judicial review of agency actions, or

Mach. & A. Wkrs. v. Nat’l Med. Bd., 138
U.S.App.D.C. 96, 425 F.2d 527 (1970).
42. The Wheelabrator Corp. v. Chafee, D.
C.Cir., 455 F.2d 1306 (1971).

to determine what kinds of agency action
under the 1970 Act may be classified as
“final” and reviewable, or when some
court remedy other than direct review
may be “adequate.” We merely note
that we see no indication whatever, let
alone the “clear and convincing evidence”
required by the Supreme Court decisions,
that the actions taken under the 1970
Act are removedfrom the judicial review
provisions of 5 U.S.C. §§ 701-706.
ly.The term “agency” is defined broad-
See 5 U.S.C. § 701(b) (1):
§ 701. Application; definitions
(b) For the purpose of this chapter—
(1) “agency” means each authority
of the Government of the United
States, whether or not it is within or
subject to review by another agency,
but does not include—
(A) the Congress;
(B) the courts of the United
States;

* * * * * *
(H) functions conferred by sec-
tions 1738, 1739, 1743, and 1744 of
title 12; chapter 2 of title 41; or
sections 1622, 1884, 1891-1902, and
former section 1641(b) (2), of title
50, appendix; and
The leading students of the APA,
whose analyses are often cited by the Su-
preme Court, and who on some matters
are in conflict with each other, seem to
be in agreement that the term “agency”
in the APA includes the President43— a
conclusion fortified by the care taken to
make express exclusion of “Congress”
and “the courts.”

But we need not consider
whetherbroughtanagainstactionforjudicialreview can
be Certainly the President eo nom­
ine. such actions can be
brought against the official who exer­
cises functions vested by Congress in the
President and delegated by the President

43. R. Berger, Administrative Arbitrariness
—A Synthesis, 78 Yale L.J. 905, 997
(1969) ; K. Davis, Administrative Arbi-
trariness —A Postscript, 114 U. of Pa.L.
Rev. 823, 832 (1966); L. Jaffee, The
761
to him 44 The Cost of Living Council is
an “authority” of the United States and
Executive Order 11615 was only record-
ing the incontrovertible when it speci-
fied that the Council “shall act as an
agency of the United States.”
None of the other exceptions listed in
5 U.S.C. § 701(b) (1) are applicable. In-
deed it is significant that Congress failed
to bring the Act within the exception of
(H). For (H) does exclude from the
definition of “agency” functions per-
formed under the Defense Production
Act. It is noteworthy that Public Law
91-379 has two Titles. Title I is cap-
tioned “Defense Production Act Amend-
ments” and its four sections constitute
amendments of the Defense Production
Act. However Title II of Public Law
91-379, captioned “Cost of Living Stabil-
ization,” is in no way made part of or re-
ferable to the Defense Production Act.
Indeed, ithas evenbeen codified as a part
of Title 12 of the U.S.Code, Banks and

Banking, appearing in a footnote to 12
U.S.C. § 1904. The applicability of the
Administrative Procedure Act cannot be
doubted.
By the same token actions
under this 1970 Act are subject to the
administrative procedure provisions of
the Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.
C. § 551 ff. It may well be that the ap­
plicability of these provisions will have
no practical consequence. The rule-mak­
ing provisions of 5 U.S.C. § 553, requir­
ing notice and opportunity for participa­
tion by interested persons, are subject
to the provision in subsection (b) remov­
ing those requirements “(B) when the
agency for good cause finds (and incor­
porates the finding and a brief statement
of reasons therefor in the rules issued)
that notice and public procedure there­
on are impracticable, unnecessary, or con­
trary to the public interest.” The ad­
judication provisions of 5 U.S.C. § 554

Right to Judicial Review, 71 IlarvX.Rev.
401,769,778,781 (1958).
44. E. g., Gu]f Oil Corp. v. Hickel, 303 F.­
Supp. 31, 32 (D.D.C.1969), affirmed 140
U.S.App.D.C. 368, 435 F.2d 440 (1970).

762

are applicable only when an agency hear-
ing is required by the statute, or by com-
pulsion of general law, cf. Wong Yang
Sung v. McGrath, 339 U.S. 33, 70 S.Ct.
445, 94 L.Ed. 616 (1950). And Yakus
upheld the validity of the failure to pro-
vide for such hearings in the 1942 maxi-
mum price law.
After the foregoing was written the
court received the Congressional Record
for October 19, 1971, which contains (at
p. S 16414) the Administration’s legis-
lative proposal for Phase II of the sta-
bilization program. The assumption
that the courts would or at least might
reach the conclusion set forth in the pre-
ceding paragraph presumably accounts
for the inclusion in that proposal of a
section 207, “Administrative review,”
that would provide an exemption from
the APA.
In the context of the applicability of
the general provisions of the Adminis-
trative Procedure Act, as amended, both
as to administrative procedure and ju-
dicial review, it is hollow to say that the
1970 Act was void ab initio for failure
to make provision for these matters. We
have no basis or warrant for considering
—or rather speculating — in this action
whether the ongoing administration of
the stabilization program may become
subject to challenge for failure to pro-
vide reasonable and meaningful opportu-
nity for interested persons to present ob-
jections or inequities that undercut the
premise of broad equity, or for officials
to take these into account, or for courts
to discharge their function of judicial
review.

12. Discussion of Schechter and other
plaintiff precedents
We end this section of the opin­
ion with broad closing references to
precedent. First a last word as to Ya­
kus. We do not understand Yakus to
rest in a crucial sense of the exercise of
the war power. No claim is made to us
that this 1970 law lies outside the sub­
stantive powers of Congress, but only
that its powers should have been exer-
cised with different techniques. Nor
does Yakus depend on the existence of
the state of war as a condition. As
pointed out by Justice Rutledge, in a dis-
senting opinion that concurred with the
majority on this issue, 321 U.S. at 462-
463, 64 S.Ct. at 685, the legislation “as
the Court’s opinion demonstrates, does
not go beyond the limits allowed by
peacetime precedents in the substantive
delegation.”
We turn finally to precedents cited by
the Union. They remind us that Sepa-
ration of Powers is a doctrine with vital-
ity. It is the force that motivated
Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,
343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153
(1952) — where however the executive or-
der seizing the nation’s steel mills was
without any authorization in legislation.
Given a legislative enactment, there have
not been any Supreme Court rulings
holding statutes unconstitutional for ex-
cessive delegation of legislative power
since the Panama Refining and Schech-
ter cases invalidated provisions of the
National Industrial Recovery Act of
1933.
These cases express a principle that
has validity — reserved for the extremist
instance. These precedents were re-
ferred to in Fahey v. Mallonee, 332 U.S.
245, 249, 67 S.Ct. 1552, 1554, 91 L.Ed.
2030 (1947):
dealt with delegation
Both cited cases
of a power to make federal crimes of
acts that never had been such be-
fore and to devise novel rules of law
in a field in which there had been no
settled law or custom.
They are without vigor for a case like
the one before us, where the delegation
is in a context of historical experience
with anti-inflation legislation.
The particular application of the del-
egation principle in Panama Refining
was colored, as students of the Court’s
decisions have noted, by the circum-
stance that the regulation in that case
was not generally available and had been
inadvertently amended out of effect — a

circumstance that led to the creation of
the Federal Register.
In Schechter, which held invalid the
provisions of the National Industrial Re­
covery Act that authorized the fixing of
codes of fair conduct, the “function of
formulating the codes was delegated, not
to a public official responsible to Con­
gress or the Executive, but to private
individuals engaged in the industries to
be regulated.” Yakus v. United States,
supra, 321 U.S. at 424, 64 S.Ct. at 667;
Fahey v. Mallonee, supra, at 249, 67
S.Ct. 1552. The “corporate state” as­
pects of the Blue Eagle codes that
emerged in practice were made possible
and reinforced by a legal context of au­
thority to prescribe “codes of fair rangecom
petition” that covered the entire
of economic life, going beyond even the
broad subject matter before us.
A supplemental memorandum in
another lawsuit has raised the question
that the President’s plans for a Price
Commission and a Pay Board do present
the very kind of delegation of govern­
ment power to private groups that was
involved in Schechter. That claim has
not been put forward by the plaintiff in
this case, possibly because the Union has
different litigating interest. We note
the point only to say that we do not and
are not required to pass on it. We have
no way of knowing whether or to what
extent the President will delegate author­
ity to persons who are not, at least pro
tanto, part of a government agency, or
will provide for review of their exercise
of such authority. More important, any
such delegation is not inherent in the
Act as passed. The presumption must
be that Congress, in vesting power in the
President, contemplated only such fur­
ther delegation as would be consistent
with law, including the requirement that
the orders providing for stabilization be
eralissuedona basis that accords with gen­
and providefairnessandavoids gross inequity,
for administration and pro­
withceduresthat are meaningfully consistent
that standard. If there should be

45. T. R. Powell, Vagaries and Varieties in Co
763
a problem withPresident,theadministrationpro-
vided by the whether as to
structure or procedure it may be subjectAct,
to attack as not consistent with the
but it does not render the Act void ab
initio, which is the Union’score claim.
Schechter has fairly been described as
a ruling that administered “the hemlock
of excessive delegation”” in a case of “del-
egation run riot.45 We think the ex-
tremist pattern then before the Court
cannot fairly be analogized to the anti-
inflation statute, limited in life and
passed in a context of experiences with
similar legislation, that is before us for
consideration.
C. OTHER LEGAL CHALLENGES
­ The Union’sother challenges are all on
matters that doubtless concern the Union
deeply but do not present significantly
troublesome legal questions.

1. Applicability to existing contracts
The Union complains that its
contracts have been impaired without
constitutional authority or validating ex­
ecutive findings. But it is plain beyond
doubt that contracts do not fetter the
constitutional authority of Congress.
Norman v. B. & O. R., 294 U.S. 240,
307-310, 55 S.Ct. 407, 79 L.Ed. 885
(1935); Louisville &N. R. v. Mottley, 219
U.S. 467, 482, 31 S.Ct. 265, 55 L.Ed. 297
(1911). “Immunity from federal regu­
lation is not gained” either through
“forehanded contracts,” see Fleming v.
Rhodes, 331 U.S. 100, 107, 67 S.Ct. 1140,
91 L.Ed. 1368 (1947), or through con­
tracts that, however commendable when
signed, would frustrate government pro­
grams if carried into effect.
There is littlepoint in marshal-­
ling the cases on the impairment of con­
tracts clause of the Constitution since
this is applicable, on its face, only to the
states. As to the Federal Government
our concern is with the due process
clause.

Whatever may be said as to the
need for reasoning to override contracts

nstitutional Interpretation (Col.U.Press) p. 79.

764
in some other context, it was not re-
quired for the general freeze so plainly
within Congressional contemplation.
The Executive Order operates in futuro,
to wage increases becoming effective
subsequent to its issuance.
While questions givenmayarise as to the
significance to be prior contracts
in any ongoing administration of the
Act, those relate at least in the first in-
stance to considerations of subsidiary ad-
ministrative policy for implementation
of the statute.
2. Applicability to fringe
benefits
The other principal question put to us
is that the authority under the 1970 law
to stabilize “wages, salaries” does not in-
clude the authority to control fringe ben-
efits.
The Union attaches decisive sig­
nificance to the absence, in the Act, of
the words “and other compensation,” a
phrase that appeared in the Defense Pro­
duction Act of 1950, and which in the
Union’s view “clearly evinced Congres­
sional intent to cover all forms of re­
muneration.” The decisive significance
attached by the Union to the wording in
the 1950 law “any wage, salary, or other
compensation” is contrary to the analy­
sis in Allen v. Grand Cent. Aircraft Co.,
347 U.S. 535, 546, 74 S.Ct. 745, 751, 98
L.Ed. 933 (1954) wherewordingtheCourt took
note that the 1950 differed
from “wages or salaries” phrase in the
1942 law, and observed: “[T]he sub­
stance of the two sections is inescapably
the same.”
The contemporaneous inter­
pretation of the 1970 law by the Execu­
tive is to be accepted unless palpably un­
reasonable or contrary to discernible leg­
islative intention. Udall v. Tallman, 380
U.S. 1, 16, 85 S.Ct. 792, 13 L.Ed.2d 616
(1965). The legislature was concerned
withinflation,the1970condition of “cost-push”
as contrasted with the “de­
mand-pull” inflationary conditions of
1942 and 1950. This supports control in
1970 of items like fringe benefits which
inevitably enter into the cost structure,
and thus intensify cost-push inflation,
even though the lack of added money in
the pockets of the worker would lessen
the impetus to “demand-pull” inflation.
* * *
A motion for a preliminary
injunction normally entails consideration
of the “probability” of successpresentationonthe
merits. The nature of the impli­
made to this court, and the clear
cation that none of the partieslitigationcontem­
plated a further stage of this evidence,
for the purpose of presenting
have led this court to consider the issues
on the assumption that what allconcernedruling
have in mind is a determinative
on the legal issues. Our view of the ap­
plicable law makes it clear that plain­
tiff’s motion for injunctive relief must
be denied.
So ordered.
ANNEX “A”
Act of August 15, 1970, P.L. 91-379,
84 Stat. 799 (as amended by P.L. 91-
558, 84 Stat. 1468; P.L. 92-8, 85 Stat.
13; P.L. 92-15, 85 Stat. 38).
To amend the Defense Production Act
of 1950 and for other purposes.

******
TITLE II— COST OF LIVING
STABILIZATION
§ 201. Short title
This title may be cited as the “Eco-
nomic Stabilization Act of 1970.”

§ 202. Presidential authority
(a) The President is authorized to
issue such orders and regulations as he
may deem appropriate to stabilize prices,
rents, wages, and salaries at levels not
less than those prevailing on May 25,
1970. Such orders and regulations may
provide for the making of such adjust-
ments as may be necessary to prevent
gross inequities.
(b) The authority conferred on the
President by this section shall not be
exercised with respect to a particular
industry or segment of the economy un-
less the President determines, after tak-
ing into account the seasonal nature of

employment, the rate of employment or
under-employment, and other mitigating
factors, that prices or wages in that in-
dustry or segment of the economy have
increased at a rate which is grossly dis-
proportionate to the rate at which prices
or wages have increased in the economy
generally.
§ 203. Delegation
The President may delegate the per-
formance of any function under this title
to such officers, departments, and agen-
cies of the United States as he may deem
appropriate.

§ 204. Penalty
Whoever willfully violates any order
or regulation under this title shall be
fined not more than $5,000.
§ 205. Injunctions

Whenever it appears to any agency of
the United States, authorized by the
President to exercise the authority con-
tained in this section to enforce orders
and regulations issued under this title,
that any person has engaged, is engaged
or is about to engage in any acts or prac-
tices constituting a violation of any reg-
ulation or order under this title, it may
in its discretion bring an action, in the
proper district court of the United States
or the proper United States court of any
territory or other place subject to the ju-
risdiction of the United States to enjoin
such acts or practices, and upon a prop-
er showing a permanent or temporary
injunction or restraining order shall be
granted without bond. Upon application
of the agency, any such court may also
issue mandatory injunctions command-
ing any person to comply with any regu-
lation or order under this title.
§ 206. Expiration

The authority to issue and enforce or-
ders and regulations under this title
expires at midnight April 30, 1972, but
such expiration shall not affect any pro-
ceeding under section 204 for a violation
of any such order or regulation, or for
the punishment for contempt committed
in the violation of any injunction under
765
section 205, committed prior to May 1,
1972.

ANNEX “B”
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 11615
August 17, 1971, 36 F.R. 15727

PROVIDING FOR STABILIZATION
OF PRICES, RENTS, WAGES
AND SALARIES
WHEREAS, in order to stabilize the
economy, reduce inflation, and minimize
unemployment, it is necessary to stabi-
lize prices, rents, wages, and salaries;
and
WHEREAS, the present balance of
payments situation makes it especially
urgent to stabilize prices, rents, wages,
and salaries in order to improve our com-
petitive position in world trade and to
protect the purchasing power of the dol-
lar:
NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the
authority vested in me by the Constitu­
tion and statutes of the United States,
including the Economic Stabilization Act
of 1970 (P.L. 91-379, 84 Stat. 799), as
amended,92 it hereby ordered as fol­
is
lows :
Section 1. (a) Prices, rents, wages,
and salaries shall be stabilized for a pe-
riod of 90 days from the date hereof at
levels not greater than the highest of
those pertaining to a substantial volume
of actual transactions by each individual,
business, firm or other entity of any kind
during the 30-day period ending August
14, 1971, for like or similar commodities
or services. If no transactions occurred
in that period, the ceiling will be the
highest price, rent, salary or wage in the
nearest preceding 30-day period in which
transactions did occur. No person shall
charge, assess, or receive, directly or in-
directly in any transaction prices or
rents in any form higher than those per-
mitted hereunder, and no person shall,
directly or indirectly, pay or agree to pay
in any transaction wages or salaries in
any form, or to use any means to obtain
payment of wages and salaries in any
form, higher than those permitted here-

766
under, whether by retroactive increase or
otherwise.
(b) Each person engaged in the busi-
ness of selling or providing commodities
or services shall maintain available for
public inspection a record of the highest
prices or rents charged for such or simi-
lar commodities or services during the
30-day period ending August 14, 1971.
(c) The provisions of sections 1 and 2
hereof shall not apply to the prices charg-
ed for raw agricultural products.
Sec. 2. (a) There is hereby establish-
ed the Cost of Living Council which shall
act as an agency of the United States
and which is hereinafter referred to as
the Council.
(b) The Council shall be composed of
the following members: The Secretary
of the Treasury, the Secretary of Agri-
culture, the Secretary of Commerce, the
Secretary of Labor, the Director of the
Office of Management and Budget, the
Chairman of the Council of Economic
Advisers, the Director of the Office of
Emergency Preparedness, and the Spe-
cial Assistant to the President for Con-
sumer Affairs. The Secretary of the
Treasury shall serve as Chairman of the
Council and the Chairman of the Council
of Economic Advisers shall serve as Vice
Chairman. The Chairman of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem shall serve as adviser to the Council.
(c) Under the direction of the Chair-
man of the Council a Special Assistant to
the President shall serve as Executive
Director of the Council, and the Execu-
tive Director is authorized to appoint
such personnel as may be necessary to
assist the Council in the performance of
its functions.
Sec. 3. (a) Except as otherwise pro-
vided herein, there are hereby delegated
to the Council all of the powers conferred
on the President by the Economic Sta-
bilization Act of 1970.
(b) The Council shall develop and rec-
ommend to the President additional poli-
cies, mechanisms, and procedures to
maintain economic growth without in-
flationary increases in prices, rents, wag-
es, and salaries after the expiration of
the 90-day period specified in Section
1 of this Order.
(c) The Council shall consult with
representatives of agriculture, industry,
labor and the public concerning the de-
velopment of policies, mechanisms and
procedures to maintain economic growth
without inflationary increases in prices,
rents, wages, and salaries.
(d) In all of its actions the Council
will be guided by the need to maintain
consistency of price and wage policies
with fiscal, monetary, international and
other economic polices of the United
States.
(e) The Council shall inform the pub-
lic, agriculture, industry, and labor con-
cerning the need for controlling inflation
and shall encourage and promote volun-
tary action to that end.
Sec. 4. (a) The Council, in carrying
out the provisions of this Order, may (i)
prescribe definitions for any terms used
herein, (ii) make exceptions or grant
exemptions, (iii) issue regulations and
orders, and (iv) take such other ac-
tions as it determines to be necessary
and appropriate to carry out the pur-
poses of this Order.
(b) The Council may redelegate to any
agency, instrumentality or official of
the United States any authority under
this Order, and may, in administering
this Order, utilize the services of any
other agencies, Federal or State, as may
be available and appropriate.
(c) On request of the Chairman of the
Council, each Executive department or
agency is authorized and directed, con-
sistent with law, to furnish the Council
with available information which the
Council may require in the performance
of its functions.
(d) All Executive departments and
agencies shall furnish such necessary as-
sistance as may be authorized by section
214 of the Act of May 3, 1945 (59 Stat.
134; 31 U.S.C. 691).
Sec. 5. The Council may require the
maintenance of appropriate records or
other evidence which are necessary in

                                                                                                   767
carrying    out the  provisions   of this  Order,        Sec. 7.   (a)  Whoever    willfully  violates
and   may   require   any  person   to  maintain      this  Order   or any  order   or regulation    is-
 and   produce    for  examination     such   rec-    sued  under   authority    of this  Order   shall
 ords  or other  evidence,   in such  form   as  it   be  fined  not   more   than  $5,000   for  each
 shall  require,   concerning     prices,   rents,    such   violation.
 wages,   and  salaries   and  all related   mat-        (b)  The   Council   shall in  its discretion
 ters.   The   Council   may    make    such   ex-    request    the  Department      of   Justice   to
 emptions    from    any   requirement     other-     bring   actions  for  injunctions    authorized
 wise  imposed    as  are  consistent   with   the    under   Section   205  of  the  Economic     Sta-
 purposes    of  this  Order.     Any    type   of    bilization   Act   of  1970  whenever     it  ap-
 record  or  evidence   required    under   regu-     pears  to  the Council   that  any  person   has
 lations  issued   under   this  Order   shall be     engaged,    is engaged,    or  is about   to  en-
 retained   for  such  period   as  the  Council      gage  in any   acts or practices   constituting
may    prescribe.                                     a violation   of any  regulation   or  order  is-
   Sec.   6.  The   expenses    of  the  Council      sued  pursuant    to this Order.
shall   be  paid   from   such    funds   of  the                            RICHARD       NIXON
Treasury     Department     as  may   be  availa-       THE    WHITE      HOUSE,
ble  therefor.                                             August    15,  1971.

                                            ANNEX      “C”

         91st  CONGRESS')        HOUSE      OF   REPRESENTATIVES              f    REPORT
            2nd   Session      r                                              j No.  91-1330

           DEFENSE        PRODUCTION         ACT    EXTENSION         AND    ECONOMIC
                                     STABILIZATION           ACT

             July  27,1970.—   Committed      to the Committee     of the  Whole   House
                       on  the State  of  Union   and  ordered   to be printed

                Mr.  Patman,   from   the  Committee    on  Banking   and   Currency,
                                     submitted    the following

                                              REPORT
                                           together   with
                    MINORITY        VIEWS     AND    ADDITIONAL          VIEWS
                                  [To   accompany     H.R.  17880]

     ******                                          lize prices,  rents,  wages,   and  salaries   at
     TITLE      II— COST-OF-LIVING                   levels  of  not  less  than   those  prevailing
             STABILIZATION                           on  May   25,  1970.
  This   title of H.R.   17880  would   provide         This  discretionary    authority   would   ex-
discretionary    authority   to  the  President      pire  on   February     28,  1971.    It  is  en-
to issue  orders   and  regulations    to stabi-     visaged   that  the freeze,  to be  effective  in

768
getting a handle on inflation, would need
to be enforced for only 2 or 3 months.
Title II of H.R. 17880 reflects a sincere
congressional willingness to do its part—
and to share the consequences— in a
meaningful attack on inflation.
Under this legislation the President
would have the authority to determine
whether or not such orders and regula-
tions should be issued. Further, the
President would have the authority to
make any adjustments within such or-
ders and regulations as deemednecessary
to prevent any inequities that might oc-
cur as the result of such stabilization or-
ders.
This title should be thought of in con-
junction with the authority given by the
Congress to the President in Public Law
91-151, enacted in December 1969,
whereby the President was given author-
ity to impose selective controls over any
or all forms of credit when he determines
that such action would be necessary or
appropriate for the purpose of prevent-
ing or controlling inflation generated by
the extension of excessive credit.
The combination of these two provi-
sions— discretionary control authority
granted the President last year and the
proposed authority provided in this leg-
islation— will, .in the opinion of your
committee, provide the President with all
of the tools necessary to control infla-
tion, while at the same time providing
for healthy economic growth. In this
way we will not need to rely exclusively
on fiscal and monetary actions which
place an inordinate burden on those seg-
ments of our economy and society least
able to bear them.
Many economists, many Members of
Congress, some of whom have introduced
legislation similar to title II of H.R.
17880,labor leaders, the AFL-CIO, may-
ors of some of our Nation’slargest cities,
and others have called on the Congress to
provide discretionary standby authority
to the President to impose wage, price,
rent, and salary controls to combat and
break the back of inflation and the infla-
tion psychology which pervades our
thinking and our economy.
A Gallup poll conducted in the middle
of June clearly indicates the wishes of
the American people in this matter.
This poll concludedthat if the question on
wage and price controls “were put to the
people of the Nation in the form of a
referendum, * * * they would * *
vote in favor of mandatory controls.”
Many Members of Congress have re-
ceived letters and an overwhelming re-
sponse to questionnaires which they have
sent their constituents favoring the in-
stitution of wage and price controls on
an equitable basis at this time. A dis-
tinguished member of our own commit-
tee from Johnson,theminorityparty, Hon. Al-
bert W. Republican, of Penn-
sylvania, perhaps has clearly reflected
the views received by many Members of
Congress when he said during the“com-* *
mittee hearings on this legislation,
I just finished tabulating a question-
naire from the people in my district and
69 percent said they favor compulsory
wage and price controls at this time in
order to control inflation.”
It is the firm opinion of the majority
of the members of your committee that
if the Congress, in its wisdom, enacts
this legislation, the President will have
all of the necessary weapons needed to
control inflation.
No one can doubt that inflation is still
on a rampage in our economy. The cost-
of-living figures released on July 22 in-
dicated that prices have risen in the first
half of this year at a 6 percent annual
rate. Granted that this rate of increase
is insignificantly less than that experi-
enced in the first half of last year, this
in no way provides any solace to the un-
employed, the aged, and others living on
fixed incomes, and the wage earner who
finds his wages continuallyliving.erodedby in-
creases in the cost of Thishousingsame
inflation is responsible for the
depression, the balance-of-payments cri-
sis, and the current liquidity squeeze.
The majority of your committee finds
that the “economic game plan” imposed
by the administration has created fan-
tastically high levels of unemployment
and, at the same time, done nothing to

effectively reduce living costs. Many
economists, including at least one aca-
demic economist who is a close adviser
to the President, has indicated that the
unemployment rate at the end of this
year would probably approach or exceed
6 percent. Already unemployment in
various industries is running at alarm-
ing levels. For example, the unemploy-
ment rate for construction workers in
a most recent month was at 9.1 percent;
for unskilled, 8.1 percent; for Negroes,
8 percent; and for the semiskilled, 6.7
percent.
Coupled with the continual price rise,
the average workweek for factory work-
ers is down substantially — to the lowest
level since the recession year of 1961.
As a result, last year the average weekly
earnings of workers in the United States
has increased less than the rise in living
costs and brought the buying power of
the worker’s weekly pay check down to
a level below that which it was 5 years
ago!
The unfortunate “economic game plan”
of the administration has also created
a situation whereby the homebuilding in-
dustry and home mortgage market is in
a depression. The commitment which
Congress gave to the American people in
the Housing Act of 1968 — to provide 26
million additional units of housing in the
next decade — obviously cannot be met
at current levels of construction. Cur-
rently, new units are being provided, at
best, at only half the annual rate needed
to meet this goal. Home mortgage inter-
est rates are at all-time highs and not
only our low- and moderate-income peo-
ple, but also middle-income people cannot
afford to acquire a home. But yet the
cost of living — inflation — continues
rampantly on.
Our Nation cannot suffer through an-
other recession without doing extreme
damage to the goals which we have set
for ourselves over the coming years. We
cannot allow productivity to be stifled
by willfully promulgating economic poli-
cies at the national level to increase un-
employment, reduce productivity, and
769
curtail the full use of all of our produc-
tive capacities.
Historic fact and economic analysis
clearly indicate that once price and wages
are brought under control, interest rates
can be drastically reduced. Currently,
the high level of interest rates include a
large percentage for expected inflation.
There is no question that interest rates
themselves are inflationary in nature.
When one looks at the level of interest
rates now being demanded and obtained
in the market of 10 percent or more,
perhaps 6 percent of that can be ac-
counted for by expected increases in
prices during the coming year.
Those members of your committee who
argued against this title during com-
mittee hearings and voted against this
title during the executive sessions, ar-
gued that legislation providing for wage
and price freezes should be mandated by
the Congress if the Congress desires this
authority, and not left up to the discre-
tion of the President. The majority of
your committee argued that this is an
obvious ploy to detract attention from
the fact that this responsibility must re-
side with the President and within the
executive branch. The Congress itself
is neither constituted or organized to
take on this function. It is not a legis-
lative function, both in terms of appro-
priate timing in instituting the controls
and removing them, since only the Exécu-
tive can determine the appropriate time
for instituting the controls and remov-
ing them, and only the Executive is
equipped to determine and establish the
necessary rules and regulations to carry
out the law once imposed.
The majority of your committee who
voted for title II of H.R. 17880 deemed
it highly improper for the Congress to
mandate such authority. In supporting
this proposal it was argued that one
could easily envision the possibility that,
once having imposed wage-price-salary-
rent freezes, a few months hence it
would be necessary to remove them in
whole or in part. But if the Congress
had mandated such action through to the

770
termination date of February 28, 1971,
as set forth in the bill, it would well be
days or weeks before such action would
be rescinded by the Congress if needed
and, indeed, the Congress itself may
not be in session when it would be ap-
propriate to remove such controls.
For these reasons, the majority of
your committee feels that such standby
authority must be left to the discretion
of the President and not mandated.
In summary, our economyhas been and
is now faced with the most anomalous
situation of recession in some quarters
with high unemployment rates, lack of
productive activity in the homebuilding
and other essential industries, and, at the
same time, substantial inflation in terms
of continued rapidly increasing prices
and all-time high interest rates. This
anomalous situation can be corrected by
giving the President the appropriate
tools to correct the situation. These
legislative tools include the selective
credit controls given to the President in
Public Law 91-151, enacted last year,
and the proposed wage-price-salary-rent
discretionary authority proposed in this
legislation.
With these tools the President will
have a full opportunity to bring the econ-
omy under control and put an end to the
twin economic evils of inflation and re-
cession which has plagued the country
in recent months.

MINORITY VIEWS
H.R. 17880 as reported is a better bill
than the bill which was introduced. It
has received our support because with-
out it the Defense Production Act of
1950would expire. However, we cannot
concur with the majority views on title
II— Costs of Living Stabilization.

******
Title II bears the innocuous title “Cost
of Living Stabilization” but actually con-
veys authority on the President to freeze
prices, rents, wages, and salaries at levels
not less than those prevailing on May 25,
1970 until February 28, 1971, slightly
after the upcoming election. Consider-
ing that titles of bills should relate to the
subject matter following in a manner
that identifies it correctly we might bet-
ter have entitled this unwanted and un-
needed title as the “Election Year
Squeezeplay” or “Devious Democratic
Demagogery.” The fact of the matter is
that the only real need for this authority
is the majority’s need for some means
of screening the root causes of current
economic problems from the electorate.
Attacks on the President for not using
this authority, which he has announced
in advance he will not use, will be the
device for creating the screen.
The action of the majority in pushing
this proviso through the committee on a
straight party line vote parallels its ac-
tion last December in enacting standby
credit controls. The only note of gratifi-
cation is that these new authorities will
be less useful as a political gimmick be-
cause despite allcriticisms, irresponsible
congressional spending and the heritage
of huge war expenditures, the Presi-
dent’s program to control inflation is
now paying off. There is really no doubt
that responsible fiscal and monetary
policies are a morecontrollingeffectiveandeconom-
ical means of inflationwages,than
administered controls over prices,
and credit.
It is interest to note that during World
War II over a quarter million people were
involved in administering the price sta-
bilization effort. During the Korean
war a much smaller and less ambitious
control effort employedmore than 17,000
people and cost over $137 million. It is
totally unrealistic to enact control au-
thority for a 7-month period such as this
billwould do. Is there anyone so foolish
as to think that the bureaucracy to ad-
minister the controls could even be as-
sembled in this time?

The case against wage and price con-
trols is no better summarized than in the
1969report of President Johnson’sCoun-
cil of Economic Advisers, which stated:
* Mandatory** price and wage controls
guidesfreezethe market mechanism
which the economy in respond-

ing to the changing pattern and vol-
ume of demand; they distort decisions
on production and employment, they
require a huge and cumbersome bu-
reaucracy; they impose a heavy and
costly burden on business; they per-
petuate inevitable injustices. They
are incompatible with a free enter-
prise economyand must be regarded as
a last resort appropriate only in an ex-
treme emergency such as all-out war.
WILLIAM B. WIDNALL.
FLORENCE P. DWYER.
SEYMOUR HALPERN.
W. E. BROCK.

ALBERT W. JOHNSON.
J. WILLIAM STANTON.
CHESTER L. MIZE.
BENJAMIN B. BLACKBURN.
GARRY BROWN.
LAWRENCE G. WILLIAMS.
CHALMERS P. WYLIE.

MARGARET M. HECKLER.
WILLIAM O. COWELR.
PHILIP M. CRANE.
CLARK MacGREGOR.
ADDITIONAL VIEWS ON H.R. 17880

H.R. 17880has as itsprimary purpose,
the extension of the Defense Production
Act of 1950from June 30, 1970,to June
30, 1972. With this purpose, no one on
the Banking and Currency Committee
disagrees. With respect to the extrane-
ous provisions which have been added to
this “vehicle,” there is much disagree-
ment of varying severity.
This disagreement occurs on the ques-
tion of adoption of cost-accounting stand-
ards and by whom such standards shall
be developed; and, on the issue of enact-
ment of standby authority in the Presi-
dent for imposition of wage and price
controls.

******
WAGE AND PRICE CONTROLS
At the outset, letme say that my con-
stituency on the onlytwo occasions in the
last 3 years when I have asked the ques-
tion on my legislative questionnaire, has
771
by a wide plurality, voted for the impo-
sition of wage and price controls. When
I let my irritation over inflation prevail
over my judgment, Ioften say to myself,
“Yes, let’s invoke them.” But even as
a rather mediocre student of economics,
I know that wage and price controls are
not the answer to the type of economic
destabilization we are now suffering.
Yet, I am willing, ifare my colleagues,
to bite the bullet and put the machinery
of controls into being. But, I refuse to
aline myself with my spineless colleagues
who would pass the buck to the President
as many of them did in similarly broad
language in the Gulf of Tonkin standby
authority.
The total insincerity of title II, the
wage and price control provisions, of this
bill ispointed out in the minority views
in this report.
The almost unlimited grant of author-
ity to the President to impose and im-
plement wage and price controls provided
for in title II would be considered ludi-
crous were it not so serious.
At a time when the electorate and some
Members of Congress are vehemently
criticizing the failure of the Congress to
assume greater authority and responsibil-
ity in the warmaking power the Presi-
dent is exercising in international af-
fairs, it is almost unbelievable that any-
one would suggest the Congress totally
abdicate its responsibility and retain no
authority with respect to the power of
the President to wage war on the econ-
omy.
It has been suggested that the wage
and price control provisions of title II
are similar to those previously enacted
by the Congress. This is pure hogwash.
Any examination of economic controls
enacted in the past would establish that
on those occasions when legislation of
this nature was enacted, section after

section of guidelines, standards, limita-
tions, and directions for implementation
were included.
To hear the chairman of the Banking
and Currency Committee unabashedly
praise this legislation when he spoke on

772
the House floor the other day, was in-
sulting to the intelligence of the member-
ship of this body. How he could keep
a straight face while performing such a
rank political ploy defies explanation.
As I have,previously indicated, I have
serious doubts about the wisdom of im-
posing wage and price controls because I
believe they would be counterproductive
in our effort to stem inflation. I, there-
fore, believe title II of this legislation
should be stricken. If title II is not
stricken, then it is imperative that the
amendment I will offer be adopted.
Briefly stated, my amendment pro-
vides the standby authority necessary for
the invoking of wage and price controls.
But there is a significant difference be-
tween my amendment and the provisions
of title II. My amendment retains au-
thority in the Congress to invoke a wage
and price freeze and then grants to the
President the authority to necessarymakeadju
ments in wages and prices for
the stabilization of the economyand pre-
vention or elimination of inequities with-
in our wage and price structure.
To permit timely action, my proposal
delegates to a joint committee consist-
ing of the Joint Economic Committee, the
Speaker and minority leader of the
House, and the majority leader and mi-
nority leader of the Senate, the authority
to determine when and if the wage and
price control provisions shall be activat-
ed.
There are those who may argue that
this delegation of authority to a joint
committee of the Congress is improper
or even unlawful. Such an argument is
clearly without merit. Not only is our
statute law full of examples of such del-
egation of authority but, in addition, the
theory has become an axiom that any
authority of this nature which may be
delegated to the executive branch may
be retained by the Congress and may be
exercised to a statutorily designated com-
mittee or body of the Congress.
In essence, my amendment puts the
priceissueofstandby authority for wage and
controls in an absolutely clear con-
text. If such standby authority is to be
enacted, responsible Members of Con-
gress will support my amendment and
those who only wish to play politics will
oppose it.

GARRY BROWN (Michigan).
We concur in these additional views.

LAWRENCE G. WILLIAMS.
ALBERT W. JOHNSON.

James HAAF and Janette Haaf,
Plaintiffs,
v.
st-BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERSal.,
OF BENTON COUNTY et
Defendants.
James HAAF and Janette Haaf,
Plaintiffs,
v.
Walter LEWANDOWSKI et al.,
Defendants.

James HAAF and Janette Haaf,
Plaintiffs,
v.
John BURNS, Defendant.
Nos. 5-71 Civ. 39,5-71 Civ. 50 and
5-71 Civ. 54.
United States District Court,
D. Minnesota,
Fifth Division.
Dec. 31,1971.
