National Federation of Independent Business v. Department of Labor, OSHA — 595 U.S. 109 (2022) — source: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Dysania22/AI_Project/main/Supreme-Court-Database/data/21A244 National Federation.txt (and ConcurrenceGorsuch, DissentBreyer)

::decision_cite:: 21A244
::decision_name::  National Federation of Independent Business v. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: 
::opinion_type:: 
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the preliminary print of the
United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter
of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington,
D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in
order that corrections may be made before the preliminary print
goes to press.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 21A244 and 21A247

															_________________

															NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A244v.

															DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, et al.

															

															OHIO, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A247v.

															DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, et al.

															on applications for stays

															[January 13, 2022]

															Per Curiam.

															The Secretary of Labor, acting through the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, recently enacted a
vaccine mandate for much of the Nation’s work force. The mandate,
which employers must enforce, applies to roughly 84 million
workers, covering virtually all employers with at least 100
employees. It requires that covered workers receive a COVID–19
vaccine, and it pre-empts contrary state laws. The only exception
is for workers who obtain a medical test each week at their own
expense and on their own time, and also wear a mask each workday.
OSHA has never before imposed such a mandate. Nor has Congress.
Indeed, although Congress has enacted significant legislation
addressing the COVID–19 pandemic, it has declined to enact any
measure similar to what OSHA has promulgated here.

															Many States, businesses, and nonprofit
organizations challenged OSHA’s rule in Courts of Appeals across
the country. The Fifth Circuit initially entered a stay. But when
the cases were consolidated before the Sixth Circuit, that court
lifted the stay and allowed OSHA’s rule to take effect. Applicants
now seek emergency relief from this Court, arguing that OSHA’s
mandate exceeds its statutory authority and is otherwise unlawful.
Agreeing that applicants are likely to prevail, we grant their
applications and stay the rule.

															I

															A

															Congress enacted the Occupational Safety and
Health Act in 1970. 84 Stat. 1590, 29 U. S. C. §651
et seq. The Act created the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA), which is part of the Department of
Labor and under the supervision of its Secretary. As its name
suggests, OSHA is tasked with ensuring occupational
safety—that is, “safe and healthful working conditions.” §651(b).
It does so by enforcing occupational safety and health standards
promulgated by the Secretary. §655(b). Such standards must be
“reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful
employment.” §652(8) (emphasis added). They must also be
developed using a rigorous process that includes notice, comment,
and an opportunity for a public hearing. §655(b).

															The Act contains an exception to those ordinary
notice-and-comment procedures for “emergency temporary standards.”
§655(c)(1). Such standards may “take immediate effect upon
publication in the Federal Register.” Ibid. They are
permissible, however, only in the narrowest of circumstances: the
Secretary must show (1) “that employees are exposed to grave danger
from exposure to substances or agents determined to be toxic or
physically harmful or from new hazards,” and (2) that the
“emergency standard is necessary to protect employees from such
danger.” Ibid. Prior to the emergence of COVID–19, the
Secretary had used this power just nine times before (and never to
issue a rule as broad as this one). Of those nine emergency rules,
six were challenged in court, and only one of those was upheld in
full. See BST Holdings, L.L.C. v. Occupational Safety and
Health Admin., 17 F. 4th 604, 609 (CA5 2021).

															B

															On September 9, 2021, President Biden
announced “a new plan to require more Americans to be vaccinated.”
Remarks on the COVID–19 Response and National Vaccination Efforts,
2021 Daily Comp. of Pres. Doc. 775, p. 2. As part of that
plan, the President said that the Department of Labor would issue
an emergency rule requiring all employers with at least 100
employees “to ensure their workforces are fully vaccinated or show
a negative test at least once a week.” Ibid. The purpose of
the rule was to increase vaccination rates at “businesses all
across America.” Ibid. In tandem with other planned
regulations, the administration’s goal was to impose “vaccine
requirements” on “about 100 million Americans, two-thirds of all
workers.” Id., at 3.

															After a 2-month delay, the Secretary of Labor
issued the promised emergency standard. 86 Fed. Reg. 61402 (2021).
Consistent with President Biden’s announcement, the rule applies to
all who work for employers with 100 or more employees. There are
narrow exemptions for employees who work remotely “100 percent of
the time” or who “work exclusively outdoors,” but those exemptions
are largely illusory. Id., at 61460. The Secretary has
estimated, for example, that only nine percent of landscapers and
groundskeepers qualify as working exclusively outside. Id.,
at 61461. The regulation otherwise operates as a blunt instrument.
It draws no distinctions based on industry or risk of exposure to
COVID–19. Thus, most lifeguards and linemen face the same
regulations as do medics and meatpackers. OSHA estimates that 84.2
million employees are subject to its mandate. Id., at
61467.

															Covered employers must “develop, implement, and
enforce a mandatory COVID–19 vaccination policy.” Id., at
61402. The employer must verify the vaccination status of each
employee and maintain proof of it. Id., at 61552. The
mandate does contain an “exception” for employers that require
unvaccinated workers to “undergo [weekly] COVID–19 testing and wear
a face covering at work in lieu of vaccination.” Id., at
61402. But employers are not required to offer this option, and the
emergency regulation purports to pre-empt state laws to the
contrary. Id., at 61437. Unvaccinated employees who do not
comply with OSHA’s rule must be “removed from the workplace.”
Id., at 61532. And employers who commit violations face
hefty fines: up to $13,653 for a standard violation, and up to
$136,532 for a willful one. 29 CFR §1903.15(d) (2021).

															C

															OSHA published its vaccine mandate on November
5, 2021. Scores of parties—including States, businesses, trade
groups, and nonprofit organizations—filed petitions for review,
with at least one petition arriving in each regional Court of
Appeals. The cases were consolidated in the Sixth Circuit, which
was selected at random pursuant to 28 U. S. C.
§2112(a).

															Prior to consolidation, however, the Fifth
Circuit stayed OSHA’s rule pending further judicial review. BST
Holdings, 17 F. 4th 604. It held that the mandate likely
exceeded OSHA’s statutory authority, raised separation-of-powers
concerns in the absence of a clear delegation from Congress, and
was not properly tailored to the risks facing different types of
workers and workplaces.

															When the consolidated cases arrived at the Sixth
Circuit, two things happened. First, many of the petitioners—nearly
60 in all—requested initial hearing en banc. Second, OSHA asked the
Court of Appeals to vacate the Fifth Circuit’s existing stay. The
Sixth Circuit denied the request for initial hearing en banc by an
evenly divided 8-to-8 vote. In re MCP No. 165, 20 F.
4th 264 (2021). Chief Judge Sutton dissented, joined by seven of
his colleagues. He reasoned that the Secretary’s “broad assertions
of administrative power demand unmistakable legislative support,”
which he found lacking. Id., at 268. A three-judge panel
then dissolved the Fifth Circuit’s stay, holding that OSHA’s
mandate was likely consistent with the agency’s statutory and
constitutional authority. See In re MCP No. 165, 2021
WL 5989357, ___ F. 4th ___ (CA6 2021). Judge Larsen dissented.

															Various parties then filed applications in this
Court requesting that we stay OSHA’s emergency standard. We
consolidated two of those applications—one from the National
Federation of Independent Business, and one from a coalition of
States—and heard expedited argument on January 7, 2022.

															II

															The Sixth Circuit concluded that a stay of the
rule was not justified. We disagree.

															A

															Applicants are likely to succeed on the merits
of their claim that the Secretary lacked authority to impose the
mandate. Administrative agencies are creatures of statute. They
accordingly possess only the authority that Congress has provided.
The Secretary has ordered 84 million Americans to either obtain a
COVID–19 vaccine or undergo weekly medical testing at their own
expense. This is no “everyday exercise of federal power.”
In re MCP No. 165, 20 F. 4th, at 272 (Sutton,
C. J., dissenting). It is instead a significant encroachment
into the lives—and health—of a vast number of employees. “We expect
Congress to speak clearly when authorizing an agency to exercise
powers of vast economic and political significance.” Alabama
Assn. of Realtors v. Department of Health and Human
Servs., 594 U. S. ___, ___ (2021) (per curiam)
(slip op., at 6) (internal quotation marks omitted). There can be
little doubt that OSHA’s mandate qualifies as an exercise of such
authority.

															The question, then, is whether the Act plainly
authorizes the Secretary’s mandate. It does not. The Act empowers
the Secretary to set workplace safety standards, not broad
public health measures. See 29 U. S. C. §655(b)
(directing the Secretary to set “occupational safety and
health standards” (emphasis added)); §655(c)(1) (authorizing the
Secretary to impose emergency temporary standards necessary to
protect “employees” from grave danger in the workplace). Confirming
the point, the Act’s provisions typically speak to hazards that
employees face at work. See, e.g., §§651, 653, 657. And no
provision of the Act addresses public health more generally, which
falls outside of OSHA’s sphere of expertise.

															The dissent protests that we are imposing “a
limit found no place in the governing statute.” Post, at 7
(joint opinion of Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, JJ.). Not so. It is
the text of the agency’s Organic Act that repeatedly makes clear
that OSHA is charged with regulating “occupational” hazards and the
safety and health of “employees.” See, e.g., 29
U. S. C. §§652(8), 654(a)(2), 655(b)–(c).

															The Solicitor General does not dispute that OSHA
is limited to regulating “work-related dangers.” Response Brief for
OSHA in No. 21A244 etc., p. 45 (OSHA Response). She instead
argues that the risk of contracting COVID–19 qualifies as such a
danger. We cannot agree. Although COVID–19 is a risk that occurs in
many workplaces, it is not an occupational hazard in most.
COVID–19 can and does spread at home, in schools, during sporting
events, and everywhere else that people gather. That kind of
universal risk is no different from the day-to-day dangers that all
face from crime, air pollution, or any number of communicable
diseases. Permitting OSHA to regulate the hazards of daily
life—simply because most Americans have jobs and face those same
risks while on the clock—would significantly expand OSHA’s
regulatory authority without clear congressional authorization.

															The dissent contends that OSHA’s mandate is
comparable to a fire or sanitation regulation imposed by the
agency. See post, at 7–9. But a vaccine mandate is
strikingly unlike the workplace regulations that OSHA has typically
imposed. A vaccination, after all, “cannot be undone at the end of
the workday.” In re MCP No. 165, 20 F. 4th, at 274
(Sutton, C. J., dissenting). Contrary to the dissent’s
contention, imposing a vaccine mandate on 84 million Americans in
response to a worldwide pandemic is simply not “part of what the
agency was built for.” Post, at 10.

															That is not to say OSHA lacks authority to
regulate occupation-specific risks related to COVID–19. Where the
virus poses a special danger because of the particular features of
an employee’s job or workplace, targeted regulations are plainly
permissible. We do not doubt, for example, that OSHA could regulate
researchers who work with the COVID–19 virus. So too could OSHA
regulate risks associated with working in particularly crowded or
cramped environments. But the danger present in such workplaces
differs in both degree and kind from the everyday risk of
contracting COVID–19 that all face. OSHA’s indiscriminate approach
fails to account for this crucial distinction—between occupational
risk and risk more generally—and accordingly the mandate takes on
the character of a general public health measure, rather than an
“occupational safety or health standard.” 29
U. S. C. §655(b) (emphasis added).

															In looking for legislative support for the
vaccine mandate, the dissent turns to the American Rescue Plan Act
of 2021, Pub. L. 117–2, 135 Stat. 4. See post, at 8. That
legislation, signed into law on March 11, 2021, of course said
nothing about OSHA’s vaccine mandate, which was not announced until
six months later. In fact, the most noteworthy action concerning
the vaccine mandate by either House of Congress has been a majority
vote of the Senate disapproving the regulation on December 8, 2021.
S. J. Res. 29, 117th Cong., 1st Sess. (2021).

															It is telling that OSHA, in its half century of
existence, has never before adopted a broad public health
regulation of this kind—addressing a threat that is untethered, in
any causal sense, from the workplace. This “lack of historical
precedent,” coupled with the breadth of authority that the
Secretary now claims, is a “telling indication” that the mandate
extends beyond the agency’s legitimate reach. Free Enterprise
Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Bd.,
561 U.S.
477, 505 (2010) (internal quotation marks omitted).[1]

															B

															The equities do not justify withholding
interim relief. We are told by the States and the employers that
OSHA’s mandate will force them to incur billions of dollars in
unrecoverable compliance costs and will cause hundreds of thousands
of employees to leave their jobs. See Application in No. 21A244,
pp. 25–32; Application in No. 21A247, pp. 32–33; see also
86 Fed. Reg. 61475. For its part, the Federal Government says that
the mandate will save over 6,500 lives and prevent hundreds of
thousands of hospitalizations. OSHA Response 83; see also 86 Fed.
Reg. 61408.

															It is not our role to weigh such tradeoffs. In
our system of government, that is the responsibility of those
chosen by the people through democratic processes. Although
Congress has indisputably given OSHA the power to regulate
occupational dangers, it has not given that agency the power to
regulate public health more broadly. Requiring the vaccination of
84 million Americans, selected simply because they work for
employers with more than 100 employees, certainly falls in the
latter category.

															*  *  *

															The applications for stays presented to
Justice Kavanaugh and by him referred to the Court are granted.

															OSHA’s COVID–19 Vaccination and Testing;
Emergency Temporary Standard, 86 Fed. Reg. 61402, is stayed pending
disposition of the applicants’ petitions for review in the United
States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit and disposition of
the applicants’ petitions for writs of certiorari, if such writs
are timely sought. Should the petitions for writs of certiorari be
denied, this order shall terminate automatically. In the event the
petitions for writs of certiorari are granted, the order shall
terminate upon the sending down of the judgment of this Court.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
 The dissent says that we
do “not contest,” post, at 6, that the mandate was otherwise
proper under the requirements for an emergency temporary standard,
see 29 U. S. C. §655(c)(1). To be clear, we express no
view on issues not addressed in this opinion.




==========

::decision_cite:: 21A244
::decision_name::  National Federation of Independent Business v. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: Gorsuch
::opinion_type:: Concurrence
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 21A244 and 21A247

															_________________

															NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A244v.

															DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, et al.

															

															OHIO, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A247v.

															DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, et al.

															on applications for stays

															[January 13, 2022]

															Justice Gorsuch, with whom Justice Thomas and
Justice Alito join, concurring.

															The central question we face today is: Who
decides? No one doubts that the COVID–19 pandemic has posed
challenges for every American. Or that our state, local, and
national governments all have roles to play in combating the
disease. The only question is whether an administrative agency in
Washington, one charged with overseeing workplace safety, may
mandate the vaccination or regular testing of 84 million people. Or
whether, as 27 States before us submit, that work belongs to state
and local governments across the country and the people’s elected
representatives in Congress. This Court is not a public health
authority. But it is charged with resolving disputes about which
authorities possess the power to make the laws that govern us under
the Constitution and the laws of the land.

															*

															I start with this Court’s precedents. There is
no question that state and local authorities possess considerable
power to regulate public health. They enjoy the “general power of
governing,” including all sovereign powers envisioned by the
Constitution and not specifically vested in the federal government.
National Federation of Independent Business v.
Sebelius, 567 U.S.
519, 536 (2012) (opinion of Roberts, C. J.); U. S.
Const., Amdt. 10. And in fact, States have pursued a variety of
measures in response to the current pandemic. E.g., Cal.
Dept. of Public Health, All Facilities Letter 21–28.1 (Dec. 27,
2021); see also N. Y. Pub. Health Law Ann. § 2164 (West 2021).

															The federal government’s powers, however, are
not general but limited and divided. See McCulloch v.
Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 405 (1819). Not only must the
federal government properly invoke a constitutionally enumerated
source of authority to regulate in this area or any other. It must
also act consistently with the Constitution’s separation of powers.
And when it comes to that obligation, this Court has established at
least one firm rule: “We expect Congress to speak clearly” if it
wishes to assign to an executive agency decisions “of vast economic
and political significance.” Alabama Assn. of Realtors v.
Department of Health and Human Servs., 594 U. S. ___,
___ (2021) (per curiam) (slip op., at 6) (internal
quotation marks omitted). We sometimes call this the major
questions doctrine. Gundy v. United States, 588
U. S. ___, ___ (2019) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (slip op., at
20).

															OSHA’s mandate fails that doctrine’s test. The
agency claims the power to force 84 million Americans to receive a
vaccine or undergo regular testing. By any measure, that is a claim
of power to resolve a question of vast national significance. Yet
Congress has nowhere clearly assigned so much power to OSHA.
Approximately two years have passed since this pandemic began;
vaccines have been available for more than a year. Over that span,
Congress has adopted several major pieces of legislation aimed at
combating COVID–19. E.g., American Rescue Plan Act of 2021,
Pub. L. 117–2, 135 Stat. 4. But Congress has chosen not to afford
OSHA—or any federal agency—the authority to issue a vaccine
mandate. Indeed, a majority of the Senate even voted to
disapprove OSHA’s regulation. See S.J. Res. 29, 117th Cong.,
1st Sess. (2021). It seems, too, that the agency pursued its
regulatory initiative only as a legislative
“ ‘work-around.’ ” BST Holdings, L.L.C. v.
OSHA, 17 F. 4th 604, 612 (CA5 2021). Far less consequential
agency rules have run afoul of the major questions doctrine.
E.g., MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. American
Telephone & Telegraph Co., 512 U.S.
218, 231 (1994) (eliminating rate-filing requirement). It is
hard to see how this one does not.

															What is OSHA’s reply? It directs us to 29
U. S. C. § 655(c)(1). In that statutory subsection,
Congress authorized OSHA to issue “emergency” regulations upon
determining that “employees are exposed to grave danger from
exposure to substances or agents determined to be toxic or
physically harmful” and “that such emergency standard[s] [are]
necessary to protect employees from such danger[s].” According to
the agency, this provision supplies it with “almost unlimited
discretion ” to mandate new nationwide rules in response to
the pandemic so long as those rules are “ reasonably
related ” to workplace safety. 86 Fed. Reg. 61402, 61405
(2021) (internal quotation marks omitted).

															The Court rightly applies the major questions
doctrine and concludes that this lone statutory subsection does not
clearly authorize OSHA’s mandate. See ante, at 5–6. Section
655(c)(1) was not adopted in response to the pandemic, but some 50
years ago at the time of OSHA’s creation. Since then, OSHA has
relied on it to issue only comparatively modest rules addressing
dangers uniquely prevalent inside the workplace, like asbestos and
rare chemicals. See In re: MCP No. 165, 20 F. 4th 264,
276 (CA6 2021) (Sutton, C. J., dissenting from denial of initial
hearing en banc). As the agency itself explained to a federal court
less than two years ago, the statute does “not authorize OSHA to
issue sweeping health standards” that affect workers’ lives outside
the workplace. Brief for Department of Labor, In re:
AFL–CIO, No. 20–1158, pp. 3, 33 (CADC 2020). Yet that is
precisely what the agency seeks to do now—regulate not just what
happens inside the workplace but induce individuals to undertake a
medical procedure that affects their lives outside the workplace.
Historically, such matters have been regulated at the state level
by authorities who enjoy broader and more general governmental
powers. Meanwhile, at the federal level, OSHA arguably is not even
the agency most associated with public health regulation. And in
the rare instances when Congress has sought to mandate
vaccinations, it has done so expressly. E.g., 8
U. S. C. § 1182(a)(1)(A)(ii). We have nothing like
that here.

															*

															Why does the major questions doctrine matter?
It ensures that the national government’s power to make the laws
that govern us remains where Article I of the Constitution says it
belongs—with the people’s elected representatives. If
administrative agencies seek to regulate the daily lives and
liberties of millions of Americans, the doctrine says, they must at
least be able to trace that power to a clear grant of authority
from Congress.

															In this respect, the major questions doctrine
is closely related to what is sometimes called the nondelegation
doctrine. Indeed, for decades courts have cited the nondelegation
doctrine as a reason to apply the major questions doctrine.
E.g., Industrial Union Dept., AFL–CIO v.
American Petroleum Institute, 448 U.S.
607, 645 (1980) (plurality opinion). Both are designed to
protect the separation of powers and ensure that any new laws
governing the lives of Americans are subject to the robust
democratic processes the Constitution demands.

															The nondelegation doctrine ensures democratic
accountability by preventing Congress from intentionally delegating
its legislative powers to unelected officials. Sometimes lawmakers
may be tempted to delegate power to agencies to “reduc[e] the
degree to which they will be held accountable for unpopular
actions.” R. Cass, Delegation Reconsidered: A Delegation Doctrine
for the Modern Administrative State, 40 Harv. J. L. Pub. Pol’y 147,
154 (2017). But the Constitution imposes some boundaries here.
Gundy, 588 U. S., at ___ (Gorsuch, J., dissenting)
(slip op., at 1). If Congress could hand off all its legislative
powers to unelected agency officials, it “would dash the whole
scheme” of our Constitution and enable intrusions into the private
lives and freedoms of Americans by bare edict rather than only with
the consent of their elected representatives. Department of
Transportation v. Association of American Railroads, 575
U.S. 43, 61 (2015) (Alito, J., concurring); see also M. McConnell,
The President Who Would Not Be King 326–335 (2020); I. Wurman,
Nondelegation at the Founding, 130 Yale L. J. 1490, 1502
(2021).

															The major questions doctrine serves a similar
function by guarding against unintentional, oblique, or otherwise
unlikely delegations of the legislative power. Sometimes, Congress
passes broadly worded statutes seeking to resolve important policy
questions in a field while leaving an agency to work out the
details of implementation. E.g., King v.
Burwell, 576 U.S. 473, 485–486 (2015). Later, the agency may
seek to exploit some gap, ambiguity, or doubtful expression in
Congress’s statutes to assume responsibilities far beyond its
initial assignment. The major questions doctrine guards against
this possibility by recognizing that Congress does not usually
“hide elephants in mouseholes.” Whitman v. American
Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U.S.
457, 468 (2001). In this way, the doctrine is “a vital check on
expansive and aggressive assertions of executive authority.”
United States Telecom Assn. v. FCC, 855 F.3d 381, 417
(CADC 2017) (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en
banc); see also N. Richardson, Keeping Big Cases From Making Bad
Law: The Resurgent Major Questions Doctrine, 49 Conn. L. Rev.
355, 359 (2016).

															Whichever the doctrine, the point is the same.
Both serve to prevent “government by bureaucracy supplanting
government by the people.” A. Scalia, A Note on the Benzene Case,
American Enterprise Institute, J. on Govt. & Soc., July–Aug.
1980, p. 27. And both hold their lessons for today’s case. On the
one hand, OSHA claims the power to issue a nationwide mandate on a
major question but cannot trace its authority to do so to any clear
congressional mandate. On the other hand, if the statutory
subsection the agency cites really did endow OSHA with the
power it asserts, that law would likely constitute an
unconstitutional delegation of legislative authority. Under OSHA’s
reading, the law would afford it almost unlimited discretion—and
certainly impose no “specific restrictions” that “meaningfully
constrai[n ]” the agency. Touby v. United
States, 500 U.S.
160, 166–167 (1991). OSHA would become little more than a
“roving commission to inquire into evils and upon discovery correct
them.” A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United
States, 295 U.S.
495, 551 (1935) (Cardozo, J., concurring). Either way, the
point is the same one Chief Justice Marshall made in 1825: There
are some “important subjects, which must be entirely regulated by
the legislature itself,” and others “of less interest, in which a
general provision may be made, and power given to [others] to fill
up the details.” Wayman v. Southard, 10 Wheat. 1, 43
(1825). And on no one’s account does this mandate qualify as some
“detail.”

															*

															The question before us is not how to respond to
the pandemic, but who holds the power to do so. The answer is
clear: Under the law as it stands today, that power rests with the
States and Congress, not OSHA. In saying this much, we do not
impugn the intentions behind the agency’s mandate. Instead, we only
discharge our duty to enforce the law’s demands when it comes to
the question who may govern the lives of 84 million Americans.
Respecting those demands may be trying in times of stress. But if
this Court were to abide them only in more tranquil conditions,
declarations of emergencies would never end and the liberties our
Constitution’s separation of powers seeks to preserve would amount
to little.

													


==========

::decision_cite:: 21A244
::decision_name::  National Federation of Independent Business v. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: Breyer
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 21A244 and 21A247

															_________________

															NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A244v.

															DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, et al.

															

															OHIO, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A247v.

															DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, et al.

															on applications for stays

															[January 13, 2022]

															

															Justice Breyer, Justice Sotomayor, and Justice
Kagan, dissenting.

															Every day, COVID–19 poses grave dangers to the
citizens of this country—and particularly, to its workers. The
disease has by now killed almost 1 million Americans and
hospitalized almost 4 million. It spreads by person-to-person
contact in confined indoor spaces, so causes harm in nearly all
workplace environments. And in those environments, more than any
others, individuals have little control, and therefore little
capacity to mitigate risk. COVID–19, in short, is a menace in work
settings. The proof is all around us: Since the disease’s onset,
most Americans have seen their workplaces transformed.

															So the administrative agency charged with
ensuring health and safety in workplaces did what Congress
commanded it to: It took action to address COVID–19’s continuing
threat in those spaces. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) issued an emergency temporary standard
(Standard), requiring either vaccination or masking
and testing, to protect American workers. The Standard falls within
the core of the agency’s mission: to “protect employees” from
“grave danger” that comes from “new hazards” or exposure to harmful
agents. 29 U. S. C. §655(c)(1). OSHA estimates—and there
is no ground for disputing—that the Standard will save over 6,500
lives and prevent over 250,000 hospitalizations in six months’
time. 86 Fed. Reg. 61408 (2021).

															Yet today the Court issues a stay that prevents
the Standard from taking effect. In our view, the Court’s order
seriously misapplies the applicable legal standards. And in so
doing, it stymies the Federal Government’s ability to counter the
unparalleled threat that COVID–19 poses to our Nation’s workers.
Acting outside of its competence and without legal basis, the Court
displaces the judgments of the Government officials given the
responsibility to respond to workplace health emergencies. We
respectfully dissent.

															I

															In 1970, Congress enacted the Occupational
Safety and Health Act (Act) “to assure so far as possible every
working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working
conditions and to preserve our human resources,” including “by
developing innovative methods, techniques, and approaches for
dealing with occupational safety and health problems.” 29
U. S. C. §§651(b), (b)(5). To that end, the Act empowers
OSHA to issue “mandatory occupational safety and health standards
applicable to businesses affecting interstate commerce.”
§651(b)(3). Still more, the Act requires OSHA to issue “an
emergency temporary standard to take immediate effect upon
publication in the Federal Register if [the agency] determines
(A) that employees are exposed to grave danger from exposure
to substances or agents determined to be toxic or physically
harmful or from new hazards, and (B) that such emergency
standard is necessary to protect employees from such danger.”
§655(c)(1).

															Acting under that statutory command, OSHA
promulgated the emergency temporary standard at issue here. The
Standard obligates employers with at least 100 employees to require
that an employee either (1) be vaccinated against COVID–19 or
(2) take a weekly COVID–19 test and wear a mask at work. 86
Fed. Reg. 61551–61553. The Standard thus encourages vaccination,
but permits employers to adopt a masking-or-testing policy instead.
(The majority obscures this choice by insistently calling the
policy a “vaccine mandate.” Ante, at 1, 4, 7, 8.) Further,
the Standard does not apply in a variety of settings. It exempts
employees who are at a reduced risk of infection because they work
from home, alone, or outdoors. See 86 Fed. Reg. 61551. It makes
exceptions based on religious objections or medical necessity. See
id., at 61552. And the Standard does not constrain any
employer able to show that its “conditions, practices, means,
methods, operations, or processes” make its workplace equivalently
“safe and healthful.” 29 U. S. C. §655(d). Consistent
with statutory requirements, the Standard lasts only six months.
See §655(c)(3).

															Multiple lawsuits challenging the Standard were
filed in the Federal Courts of Appeals. The applicants asked the
courts to stay the Standard’s implementation while their legal
challenges were pending. The lawsuits were consolidated in the
Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. See 28 U. S. C.
§2112(a)(3). That court dissolved a stay previously entered, thus
allowing the Standard to take effect. See In re MCP No.
165, 2021 WL 5989357, ___ F. 4th ___ (2021). The
applicants now ask this Court to stay the Standard for the duration
of the litigation. Today, the Court grants that request,
contravening clear legal principles and itself causing grave danger
to the Nation’s workforce.

															II

															The legal standard governing a request for
relief pending appellate review is settled. To obtain that relief,
the applicants must show: (1) that their “claims are likely to
prevail,” (2) “that denying them relief would lead to
irreparable injury,” and (3) “that granting relief would not
harm the public interest.” Roman Catholic Diocese of
Brooklyn v. Cuomo, 592 U. S. ___, ___ (2020)
(per curiam) (slip op., at 2). Moreover, because the
applicants seek judicial intervention that the Sixth Circuit
withheld below, this Court should not issue relief unless the
applicants can establish that their entitlement to relief is
“indisputably clear.” South Bay United Pentecostal Church v.
Newsom, 590 U. S. ___, ___ (2020) (Roberts, C. J.,
concurring in denial of application for injunctive relief )
(slip op., at 2) (internal quotation marks omitted). None of these
requirements is met here.

															III

															A

															The applicants are not “likely to prevail”
under any proper view of the law. OSHA’s rule perfectly fits the
language of the applicable statutory provision. Once again, that
provision commands—not just enables, but commands—OSHA to issue an
emergency temporary standard whenever it determines “(A) that
employees are exposed to grave danger from exposure to substances
or agents determined to be toxic or physically harmful or from new
hazards, and (B) that such emergency standard is necessary to
protect employees from such danger.” 29 U. S. C.
§655(c)(1). Each and every part of that provision demands that, in
the circumstances here, OSHA act to prevent workplace harm.

															The virus that causes COVID–19 is a “new hazard”
as well as a “physically harmful” “agent.” Merriam-Webster’s
Collegiate Dictionary 572 (11th ed. 2005) (defining “hazard” as a
“source of danger”); id., at 24 (defining “agent” as a
“chemically, physically, or biologically active principle”);
id., at 1397 (defining “virus” as “the causative agent of an
infectious disease”).

															The virus also poses a “grave danger” to
millions of employees. As of the time OSHA promulgated its rule,
more than 725,000 Americans had died of COVID–19 and millions more
had been hospitalized. See 86 Fed. Reg. 61408, 61424; see also CDC,
COVID Data Tracker Weekly Review: Interpretive Summary for Nov. 5,
2021 (Jan. 12, 2022),
https://cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019–ncov/covid-data/covidview/
past-reports/11052021.html. Since then, the disease has continued
to work its tragic toll. In the last week alone, it has caused, or
helped to cause, more than 11,000 new deaths. See CDC, COVID Data
Tracker (Jan. 12, 2022), https://
covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#cases_deathsinlast7days. And
because the disease spreads in shared indoor spaces, it presents
heightened dangers in most workplaces. See 86 Fed. Reg. 61411,
61424.

															Finally, the Standard is “necessary” to address
the danger of COVID–19. OSHA based its rule, requiring either
testing and masking or vaccination, on a host of studies and
government reports showing why those measures were of unparalleled
use in limiting the threat of COVID–19 in most workplaces. The
agency showed, in meticulous detail, that close contact between
infected and uninfected individuals spreads the disease; that
“[t]he science of transmission does not vary by industry or by type
of workplace”; that testing, mask wearing, and vaccination are
highly effective—indeed, essential—tools for reducing the risk of
transmission, hospitalization, and death; and that unvaccinated
employees of all ages face a substantially increased risk from
COVID–19 as compared to their vaccinated peers. Id., at
61403, 61411–61412, 61417–61419, 61433–61435, 61438–61439. In
short, OSHA showed that no lesser policy would prevent as much
death and injury from COVID–19 as the Standard would.

															OSHA’s determinations are “conclusive if
supported by substantial evidence.” 29 U. S. C.
§655(f ). Judicial review under that test is deferential, as
it should be. OSHA employs, in both its enforcement and health
divisions, numerous scientists, doctors, and other experts in
public health, especially as it relates to work environments. Their
decisions, we have explained, should stand so long as they are
supported by “ ‘such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.’ ”
American Textile Mfrs. Institute, Inc. v. Donovan,
452 U.S.
490, 522 (1981) (quoting Universal Camera Corp. v.
NLRB, 340 U.S.
474, 477 (1951)). Given the extensive evidence in the record
supporting OSHA’s determinations about the risk of COVID–19 and the
efficacy of masking, testing, and vaccination, a court could not
conclude that the Standard fails substantial-evidence review.

															B

															The Court does not dispute that the statutory
terms just discussed, read in the ordinary way, authorize this
Standard. In other words, the majority does not contest that
COVID–19 is a “new hazard” and “physically harmful agent”; that it
poses a “grave danger” to employees; or that a testing and masking
or vaccination policy is “necessary” to prevent those harms.
Instead, the majority claims that the Act does not “plainly
authorize[ ]” the Standard because it gives OSHA the power to
“set workplace safety standards” and COVID–19 exists both
inside and outside the workplace. Ante, at 6. In other
words, the Court argues that OSHA cannot keep workplaces safe from
COVID–19 because the agency (as it readily acknowledges) has no
power to address the disease outside the work setting.

															But nothing in the Act’s text supports the
majority’s limitation on OSHA’s regulatory authority. Of course,
the majority is correct that OSHA is not a roving public health
regulator, see ante, at 6–7: It has power only to protect
employees from workplace hazards. But as just explained, that is
exactly what the Standard does. See supra, at 5–6. And the
Act requires nothing more: Contra the majority, it is indifferent
to whether a hazard in the workplace is also found elsewhere. The
statute generally charges OSHA with “assur[ing] so far as possible
. . . safe and healthful working conditions.” 29
U. S. C. §651(b). That provision authorizes regulation to
protect employees from all hazards present in the workplace—or, at
least, all hazards in part created by conditions there. It does not
matter whether those hazards also exist beyond the workplace walls.
The same is true of the provision at issue here demanding the
issuance of temporary emergency standards. Once again, that
provision kicks in when employees are exposed in the workplace to
“new hazards” or “substances or agents” determined to be
“physically harmful.” §655(c)(1). The statute does not require that
employees are exposed to those dangers only while on the workplace
clock. And that should settle the matter. When Congress “enact[s]
expansive language offering no indication whatever that the statute
limits what [an agency] can” do, the Court cannot “impos[e] limits
on an agency’s discretion that are not supported by the text.”
Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter and Paul Home v.
Pennsylvania, 591 U. S. ___, ___ (2020) (slip op., at
16) (alteration and internal quotation marks omitted). That is what
the majority today does—impose a limit found no place in the
governing statute.

															Consistent with Congress’s directives, OSHA has
long regulated risks that arise both inside and outside of the
workplace. For example, OSHA has issued, and applied to nearly all
workplaces, rules combating risks of fire, faulty electrical
installations, and inadequate emergency exits—even though the
dangers prevented by those rules arise not only in workplaces but
in many physical facilities (e.g., stadiums, schools,
hotels, even homes). See 29 CFR §1910.155 (2020) (fire);
§§1910.302–1910.308 (electrical installations); §§1910.34–1910.39
(exit routes). Similarly, OSHA has regulated to reduce risks from
excessive noise and unsafe drinking water—again, risks hardly
confined to the workplace. See §1910.95 (noise); §1910.141 (water).
A biological hazard—here, the virus causing COVID–19—is no
different. Indeed, Congress just last year made this clear. It
appropriated $100 million for OSHA “to carry out COVID–19 related
worker protection activities” in work environments of all kinds.
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, Pub. L. 117–2, 135 Stat. 30. That
legislation refutes the majority’s view that workplace exposure to
COVID–19 is somehow not a workplace hazard. Congress knew—and
Congress said—that OSHA’s responsibility to mitigate the harms of
COVID–19 in the typical workplace do not diminish just because the
disease also endangers people in other settings.

															That is especially so because—as OSHA amply
established—COVID–19 poses special risks in most workplaces, across
the country and across industries. See 86 Fed. Reg. 61424 (“The
likelihood of transmission can be exacerbated by common
characteristics of many workplaces”). The majority ignores these
findings, but they provide more-than-ample support for the
Standard. OSHA determined that the virus causing COVID–19 is
“readily transmissible in workplaces because they are areas where
multiple people come into contact with one another, often for
extended periods of time.” Id., at 61411. In other words,
COVID–19 spreads more widely in workplaces than in other venues
because more people spend more time together there. And critically,
employees usually have little or no control in those settings.
“[D]uring the workday,” OSHA explained, “workers may have little
ability to limit contact with coworkers, clients, members of the
public, patients, and others, any one of whom could represent a
source of exposure to” the virus. Id., at 61408. The agency
backed up its conclusions with hundreds of reports of workplace
COVID–19 outbreaks—not just in cheek-by-jowl settings like factory
assembly lines, but in retail stores, restaurants, medical
facilities, construction areas, and standard offices. Id.,
at 61412–61416. But still, OSHA took care to tailor the Standard.
Where it could exempt work settings without exposing employees to
grave danger, it did so. See id., at 61419–61420;
supra, at 3. In sum, the agency did just what the Act told
it to: It protected employees from a grave danger posed by a new
virus as and where needed, and went no further. The majority, in
overturning that action, substitutes judicial diktat for reasoned
policymaking.

															The result of its ruling is squarely at odds
with the statutory scheme. As shown earlier, the Act’s explicit
terms authorize the Standard. See supra, at 4–6. Once again,
OSHA must issue an emergency standard in response to new hazards in
the workplace that expose employees to “grave danger.” §655(c)(1);
see supra, at 2–4. The entire point of that provision is to
enable OSHA to deal with emergencies—to put into effect the new
measures needed to cope with new workplace conditions. The enacting
Congress of course did not tell the agency to issue this Standard
in response to this COVID–19 pandemic—because that Congress could
not predict the future. But that Congress did indeed want OSHA to
have the tools needed to confront emerging dangers (including
contagious diseases) in the workplace. We know that, first and
foremost, from the breadth of the authority Congress granted to
OSHA. And we know that because of how OSHA has used that authority
from the statute’s beginnings—in ways not dissimilar to the action
here. OSHA has often issued rules applying to all or nearly all
workplaces in the Nation, affecting at once many tens of millions
of employees. See, e.g., 29 CFR §1910.141. It has previously
regulated infectious disease, including by facilitating
vaccinations. See §1910.1030(f ). And it has in other contexts
required medical examinations and face coverings for employees. See
§§1910.120(q)(9)(i), 1910.134. In line with those prior actions,
the Standard here requires employers to ensure testing and masking
if they do not demand vaccination. Nothing about that measure is so
out-of-the-ordinary as to demand a judicially created exception
from Congress’s command that OSHA protect employees from grave
workplace harms.

															If OSHA’s Standard is far-reaching—applying to
many millions of American workers—it no more than reflects the
scope of the crisis. The Standard responds to a workplace health
emergency unprecedented in the agency’s history: an infectious
disease that has already killed hundreds of thousands and sickened
millions; that is most easily transmitted in the shared indoor
spaces that are the hallmark of American working life; and that
spreads mostly without regard to differences in occupation or
industry. Over the past two years, COVID–19 has affected—indeed,
transformed—virtually every workforce and workplace in the Nation.
Employers and employees alike have recognized and responded to the
special risks of transmission in work environments. It is perverse,
given these circumstances, to read the Act’s grant of emergency
powers in the way the majority does—as constraining OSHA from
addressing one of the gravest workplace hazards in the agency’s
history. The Standard protects untold numbers of employees from a
danger especially prevalent in workplace conditions. It lies at the
core of OSHA’s authority. It is part of what the agency was built
for.

															IV

															Even if the merits were a close question—which
they are not—the Court would badly err by issuing this stay. That
is because a court may not issue a stay unless the balance of harms
and the public interest support the action. See Trump v.
International Refugee Assistance Project, 582 U. S.
___, ___ (2017) (per curiam) (slip op., at 10) (“Before
issuing a stay, it is ultimately necessary to balance the
equities—to explore the relative harms” and “the interests of the
public at large” (alterations and internal quotation marks
omitted)); supra, at 4. Here, they do not. The lives and
health of the Nation’s workers are at stake. And the majority
deprives the Government of a measure it needs to keep them
safe.

															Consider first the economic harms asserted in
support of a stay. The employers principally argue that the
Standard will disrupt their businesses by prompting hundreds of
thousands of employees to leave their jobs. But OSHA expressly
considered that claim, and found it exaggerated. According to OSHA,
employers that have implemented vaccine mandates have found that
far fewer employees actually quit their jobs than threaten to do
so. See 86 Fed. Reg. 61474–61475. And of course, the Standard does
not impose a vaccine mandate; it allows employers to require only
masking and testing instead. See supra, at 3. In addition,
OSHA noted that the Standard would provide employers with some
countervailing economic benefits. Many employees, the agency
showed, would be more likely to stay at or apply to an employer
complying with the Standard’s safety precautions. See 86 Fed. Reg.
61474. And employers would see far fewer work days lost from
members of their workforces calling in sick. See id., at
61473–61474. All those conclusions are reasonable, and entitled to
deference.

															More fundamentally, the public interest here—the
interest in protecting workers from disease and death—overwhelms
the employers’ alleged costs. As we have said, OSHA estimated that
in six months the emergency standard would save over 6,500 lives
and prevent over 250,000 hospitalizations. See id., at
61408. Tragically, those estimates may prove too conservative.
Since OSHA issued the Standard, the number of daily new COVID–19
cases has risen tenfold. See CDC, COVID Data Tracker (Jan. 12,
2022), https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#trends_ dailycases
(reporting a 7-day average of 71,453 new daily cases on Nov. 5,
2021, and 751,125 on Jan. 10, 2022). And the number of
hospitalizations has quadrupled, to a level not seen since the
pandemic’s previous peak. CDC, COVID Data Tracker (Jan. 12, 2022),
https://covid.cdc.gov/covid-data-tracker/#new-hospital-admissions
(reporting a 7-day average of 5,050 new daily hospital admissions
on Nov. 5, 2021, and 20,269 on Jan. 10, 2022). And as long as the
pandemic continues, so too does the risk that mutations will
produce yet more variants—just as OSHA predicted before the rise of
Omicron. See 86 Fed. Reg. 61409 (warning that high transmission and
insufficient vaccination rates could “foster the development of new
variants that could be similarly, or even more, disruptive” than
those then existing). Far from diminishing, the need for broadly
applicable workplace protections remains strong, for all the many
reasons OSHA gave. See id., at 61407–61419, 61424,
61429–61439, 61445–61447.

															These considerations weigh decisively against
issuing a stay. This Court should decline to exercise its equitable
discretion in a way that will—as this stay will—imperil the lives
of thousands of American workers and the health of many more.

															*  *  *

															Underlying everything else in this dispute is
a single, simple question: Who decides how much protection, and of
what kind, American workers need from COVID–19? An agency with
expertise in workplace health and safety, acting as Congress and
the President authorized? Or a court, lacking any knowledge of how
to safeguard workplaces, and insulated from responsibility for any
damage it causes?

															Here, an agency charged by Congress with
safeguarding employees from workplace dangers has decided that
action is needed. The agency has thoroughly evaluated the risks
that the disease poses to workers across all sectors of the
economy. It has considered the extent to which various policies
will mitigate those risks, and the costs those policies will
entail. It has landed on an approach that encourages vaccination,
but allows employers to use masking and testing instead. It has
meticulously explained why it has reached its conclusions. And in
doing all this, it has acted within the four corners of its
statutory authorization—or actually here, its statutory mandate.
OSHA, that is, has responded in the way necessary to alleviate the
“grave danger” that workplace exposure to the “new hazard[ ]”
of COVID–19 poses to employees across the Nation. 29
U. S. C. §655(c)(1). The agency’s Standard is informed by
a half century of experience and expertise in handling workplace
health and safety issues. The Standard also has the virtue of
political accountability, for OSHA is responsible to the President,
and the President is responsible to—and can be held to account
by—the American public.

															And then, there is this Court. Its Members are
elected by, and accountable to, no one. And we “lack[ ] the
background, competence, and expertise to assess” workplace health
and safety issues. South Bay United Pentecostal Church, 590
U. S., at ___ (opinion of Roberts, C. J.) (slip op., at
2). When we are wise, we know enough to defer on matters like this
one. When we are wise, we know not to displace the judgments of
experts, acting within the sphere Congress marked out and under
Presidential control, to deal with emergency conditions. Today, we
are not wise. In the face of a still-raging pandemic, this Court
tells the agency charged with protecting worker safety that it may
not do so in all the workplaces needed. As disease and death
continue to mount, this Court tells the agency that it cannot
respond in the most effective way possible. Without legal basis,
the Court usurps a decision that rightfully belongs to others. It
undercuts the capacity of the responsible federal officials, acting
well within the scope of their authority, to protect American
workers from grave danger.

													
