Wirtz v. Baldor Electric Co. — 337 F.2d 518 (D.C. Cir. 1963) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/265700.pdf

W.  Willard   WIRTZ,    Secretary  of Labor,
                 Appellant,
                      v.
BALDOR      ELECTRIC      COMPANY       et al.,
                 Appellees.
                 No.  17770.
     United   States Court   of Appeals
       District of  Columbia   Circuit.
          Argued    June  27, 1963.
           Decided  Dec.  31, 1963.
  Supplemental    Opinion   After  Remand
               June   29, 1964.

519

520























Mr. Howard E. Shapiro, Atty., Dept,
of Justice, with whom Asst. Atty. Gen.
John W. Douglas, Messrs. David C.Ache-
son, U. S. Atty., Charles Donohue, Sol.,
Dept, of Labor, Alan S. Rosenthal, Atty.,
Dept, of Justice, Miss Bessie Margolin,
Asst. Sol., Dept, of Labor, and Mr. Wil-
liam A. Lowe, Atty., Dept, of Labor,
were on the brief, for appellant. Messrs.
Frank Q. Nebeker, Gil Zimmerman and
William H. Willcox, Asst. U. S. Attys.,
also entered appearances for appellant.

Mr. Samuel W. Murphy, Jr., New
York City, of the bar of the Court of
Appeals of New York, pro hac vice, by
special leave of court, with whom Mr.
Edward R. Kenney, Washington, D. C.,

1. The purpose of the Walsh-Healey Act
was of States,coursetocontractingmakecertainthatt
United in use, forpatronizemate
als for its paidownwagesdid not
firms which lower than those
being generally paid in the industry. Un­
der Sectionby1(b) of the Act every con­
tract madestipulationaGovernment agency must
contain a that the manufac­
turer will pay to Ms employees engaged
in the manufacture or furnishing of the
contract goods minimum wages which are
not less than—
was on the brief, for appellees. Mr.
John W. Martin, Jr., Washington, D. C.,
also entered an appearance for appellees.
Before Bazelon, Chief Judge, and
Washington and Wright, Circuit Judg-
es.

WASHINGTON, Circuit Judge:
The Secretary of Labor appeals
from a District Court order setting
aside his determination, under the Walsh­
Healey Public Contracts Act, 49 Stat.
2036-39, 41 U.S.C. §§ 35-45, of the pre­
vailing minimum wage in the electrical
motors and generators industry.1 The
chief questions presented are whether
the Secretary of Labor properly based
his determination of the prevailing min­
imum wages in the industry on a broad
survey conducted under his auspices,
where at the same time (a) he declined
to disclose at the hearing the underlying
data on which the wage conclusions in
the survey were based, and (b) uncon­
tradicted evidence was submitted by the
industry which cast serious doubt on the
accuracy and reliability of the survey’s
results.
In the years immediately following the
passage of the Walsh-Healey Act these
questions could perhaps have been easily
answered in the affirmative. In Perkins
v. Lukens Steel Co., 310 U.S. 113, 60
S.Ct. 869, 84 L.Ed. 1108 (1940), the Su-
preme Court held that members of an
industry to which the Secretary’s mini-
mum wage determination applied had no
standing to challenge his action, that the
Walsh-Healey Act “was not intended to
be a bestowal of litigable rights upon
those desirous of selling to the Govern-

“the minimum wages as determined by
he tbe Secretary of Labor to be the pre-
ri­ vailing minimum wages for persons em-
ployed on similar work or in the partic-
ular or similar industries or groups
of industries currently operating in the
locality in which the materials, sup-
plies, articles, or equipment are to be
manufactured or furnished under said
contract * * 41 U.S.O. § 35(b).

ment”, and that the Act evinced a “lack
of intention to create any rights for
prospective bidders before a purchase is
concluded.” 310 U.S. at 127, 128, 60
S.Ct. at 877. As a result of the Perkins
decision, the Labor Department’s pro-
cedures in administering the Actreview,wer
in general not subjecteventuallytojudicial
and the Department came to
rely— as the basis for its minimum wage
determinations— onwagestheconfidentialbysur-
veys of prevailing conducted its
Bureau of Labor Statistics.2
In 1952,the Walsh-Healey Act and its
administration came under fresh scru-
tiny by Congress. The Fulbright
Amendment, 66 Stat. 308, 41 U.S.C. §
43a, enacted in that year, added Section
10 to the Act, the tenor and effect of
which will be considered in Part I, im-
mediately following, which deals with
the central questions in the case, referred
to at the beginning of this opinion.3
I.

Section 10 of the Walsh-Healey
Act, added by the Fulbright Amendment,
provides in pertinent part:
“(a) Notwithstanding any provi-
sion of section 4Act,ofthe Administra-
tiveapplicableProcedureinthesuchadministrationAct
be
of sections 1 to 5 and 7 to 9 of this
Act.
“(b) All wage determinations
under section 1(b) of this Act shall
be made on hearing.therecordafter oppor-any
tunitywagefora Review* of* *
such determination
may be had within ninety days after
such determination is made * * *

2. See, generally, Modley, Patton and Reil-
ly, Problem Child Among Labor Latos—
The Walsh-Healey Aet, 1963 Duke L.J.
205.
3. The Secretary contends that the plain-
tifis-appellees have no standing them-
selves to maintain this suit and in any
event that the suit cannot be maintained
as a class action. But since the record
before us indicates that it is probable
that some of the plaintiffs at leastsue,will
be found to have standingprincipaltoquos-we
proceed at once to the
521
by any person adversely affected or
aggrieved thereby, who shall be
deemed to include any manufacturer
of, or regular dealer in, materials,
supplies, articles or equipment pur-
chased or to be purchased by the
e Governmentanyindustryfromanysource, whowageis
in toapplicable.”whichsuch
determination is
The relevant portion of Section 7(c)
of the Administrative Procedure Act, 60
Stat. 241, 5 U.S.C. § 1006(c), states:
“Except as statutes otherwise pro-
vide, the proponent of a rule or or-
der shall have the burden of proof.
* * * no sanction shall be imposed
or rule or order be issued except up-
on considerationportionsofthewholemayrecord
or such thereof as be
cited by any party and as supported
by and in accordance with the reli-
able, probative, and substantial evi-
dence. Every party shall have the
right to present his case or defense
by oral or documentary evidence, to
submit rebuttal evidence,and to con-
duct such cross-examination as may
be required for a full4and true dis-
closure of the facts.”
Section 10(e) (B) of the Administrative
shallProcedure Act provides, insofar as here
material, that upon review, courts shall
“set aside agency action, *findings,** and
conclusions found to be (4)
without observance of procedureby re-
quired by law; (5) unsupportedanysubjectsub-to
stantialrequirementsevidenceinofsectionscase7and 8
the the Administrative Procedure Act]
[of
* * See 60 Stat. 243, 5 U.S.C. §
1009(e) (B).

tions raised, and leave for later Parts
of this opinion our comments on the
standing and class action points.
4. That the proceedings now under consid-
eration involved “rule-making” rather
than “adjudication” appears irrelevant;
Congress provided the same requiredproceduralby
safeguards “Where rules are
statute to be made onagencytherecordhearing”after
opportunityadjudications.foran 4(b) asof
for See SectionAct, 5
the Administrative1003(b).Procedure U.
S.C. §

522
broughtThesuit presentlytheoryunder review was
on the that under Sec-
tion 10(e) (B) of the Administrative
Procedure Act the District Court shouldwa
set aside the Secretary’sindustryminimum
determination for the because
the administrative hearing did not pro-
vide the procedural safeguards conferred
by Section 7(c) of thesupportedActandthebyde-
termination was not A de-r
liable and substantial evidence.
scription follows of the administrative
hearing culminating in the wage deter-
mination.
Pursuant to Section 1(b) of the Walsh-
Healey Act, supra footnote 1, the De-
partment of Labor instituted an admin-
istrative proceeding forwagesthe purposepre-of
determining minimum which mo-
vail in two branchesindustryofthe electric
tors andbranch,generatorsproducingequipment—thefrac-
tional horsepower, and the in-
less than one equipment
tegralhorsepowerbranch,producingup.In connectionof
one this proceeding,and the Bureau of La-
with Statistics (“BLS”) of the Depart-
bor a survey by
ment of Labor undertookdesigned
means of a questionnaire, to as-i
certain the number of establishments
the industry, theestablishment,numberofcovered
workers in each and the
wages paid by each establishment.
The BLS questionnaire,confidentiality,5whic
tained a pledge of was

5. “The replies will be treated in. confi-
dence. The completed questionnaire
forms will be seen only by sworn em-
ployees of the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics and no information identified by
company name will be released. The
nature of the tabulations required for
prevailing minimum wage determina-
tion may result in the showing of lim-
ited data for some individual estab-
lishments without identification by com-
pany name.”
6. A Bureau witness testified “We pledge
that we will not provide any data from
these lists of any sort [and] that they
are to be used as a source for statistical
tabulation and to be used only for statis-
tical purposes.” He testified that dis-
closure of the names of the establish-
ments to whom the Bureau sent a ques-
tionnaire form would violate the pledge.
circulated to 775 establishments. The
names of these establishments were pri-
marily obtained from unemployment
ge compensation insurance listings fur-
nished in confidenceby the several States
to the Department of Labor.6 Establish-
ments within the scope of the survey7
were asked to report data respecting to-
tal employment,hourlyearningstotalcoveredworkers,8
e- and payroll periodofcoveredendingworkers
for the nearest
October 15, 1960.
After the answers had been received,
BLS compiledsix tables summarizing the
wage data of 216 firms determined by it
to be within the scope of the survey but
not identified in the tables. Of these
firms, 212 had answered the question-
naire circulated by BLS and the data as
to the other 4 firms (which had declined
of to answer) was estimated.
After the tables had been compiled,
a hearing to determine the prevailing
minimum wages in the industry, pursu-
ant to Section 10(b) of the Walsh-Healey
Act, was scheduled before a Hearing Ex-
aminer. Copies of the BLS wage tables
were furnished to the National Electri-
n cal Manufacturers Association (“NE-
MA,” appellees’trade association) about
five weeks before the hearing date.

Eight days before the hearing NEMA
hcon-informed companies,theBureauthatithadhadobtainedreceived
from 61 which

7. The survey was designed to include all
establishments with ten or more covered
employees and having 50% or more of
sales made up of products within the mo-
tors and generators industry.
8. The questionnaire asked the establish-
ment to report the number of covered
workers receiving hourly earnings of less
than $1, of between $1 and $1.009, of be-
tween $1.01 and $1.019, and of amounts
progressing thereafter by 1 cent up to an
amount between $1.99 and $1.999. The
establishment was further asked to re-
port the number of covered workers re-
ceiving hourly earnings in categories be-
ginning at $2.00 to $2.049 per hour and
of amounts progressing thereafter by 5
cents up to an amount of between $2.70
and $2.749 per hour. The final category
was the number of covered workers re-
ceiving $2.75 per hour and over.

the BLS questionnaire, copies of their
answers and also independent data as to
the wages paid by the companies;discrepanci
that it (NEMA)wagehad foundgiven
between the data to it and
the data reported to the Bureau. The
Bureau examinedonlythe discrepancies cited
and found that two would affect the
result.originalTheseloweredto some extenttopre-t
vailing estimateswages.inthe tables as
minimum
The day before the hearing NEMA ap-
plied to the Hearing Examiner for a
subpoena duces tecum requiring the
Commissioner of Labor Statistics to pro-
duce for inspection:9
(1) The completed questionnaire
forms.
(2) A list of all establishments to
which the BLS questionnaire was sent.
(3) A list of all establishments from
which answers to the questionnaire were
received.
(4) All the correspondence relating
to the questionnaire.
In support of its application NEMA
pointed out that on the basis of its own
limited investigations there was a sub-
stantial possibility that themisunderstood,BLS
tionnaire had beengivenwidely signifi-
that theerrors,answers contained
cant and that the documents re-
quested were necessary to evaluate the
BLS wage tabulationsrelatingandtoassist in
cross-examination to their ac-
curacyarguedandreliability. Department coun-
sel pledge that disclosuregivenwould violate
the of confidence hadtofurnishedbusi
firms and to States whichcompensation lists,
their unemployment
and would seriously impede the Bureau’s
efforts to obtain economicdata in the fu-
ture. The Hearing Examiner denied the
subpoena application.

9. Counsel for NEMA liad previously re-
quested, under a pledge of confidential
treatment, the opportunity to inspect ei-
ther the questionnaire responses or a
list of establishments whose data was to
be included in the tables. This was de-
nied.
523
At the hearing,objectiontheGovernment intro­wage
duced withoutSamuels, the sixwitness,
esandtables. Mr.supervised thesurvey,BLStestified
who had examiningthe the answers tab­
that without questions
atingulatedhecould not answerspecific types rel­
companyto names and of
included. When counseltorefreshfor
hehisNEMArecollectionaskedMr.bySamuelsexaminingthean­
swered questionnaires, the Secretary’s
counsel successfully objected. Counsel
for NEMA thereupon unsuccessfully at­
tempted to introduce affidavits by offi­
cials of several establishments stating
that data had been erroneously reported
to BLS by their companies. NEMA then
moved to strike the testimony of Mr.
Samuels and the BLS wage tables, on the
ground that Mr. Samuel’s testimony
“was based on a perusal of records which
have not been madegroundavailable to us and
on the further that we are not
being allowed to impeach his testimony
with respect to the wage tables by offer­
ing these affidavits.” This motion was
mitteddenied.byTheagreement.affidavitswereOnthehoweverad­of
the affidavits BLS agreed to furtherbasisre­
visions in the wage tables.10
ques-The Secretary’s Determination. Sec-
retary Goldberg, the predecessor of the
appellant, upon review of the record up-
held the Hearing Examiner’s rulings re-
fusing to issue the subpoena, and deny-
ing NEMA’s motion to strike the BLS
wage tables and the testimony of Mr.
Samuels. The Secretary stated that—
“ * * * nearly
ness sponse the universal re-
the Bureau was able to obtain
in this survey, the high ratio of re-
sponse it obtains in its other sur-
veys, and the resultant quality of
such work, depends on giving and
honoring assurances of confidential

10, Dr. Modley, a specialist in economics
and statistics, testified on bebalf of
NEMA that in bis opinion, for stated
reasons, the data furnished by the indus-
try to BLS was, through misunderstand-
ing, unreliable and that a survey based
on the answers given was not a sound
basisfor wage determinations.

524
treatment — such as those involved
here. A representative from the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics testified that
if the pledge of confidentiality were
violated in theselongerproceedings,guarantee‘th
Bureau couldno its
pledge of confidentiality and would
in all likelihood go out of business.’
* *

“In determining whether the sub-
poena duces tecum should have been
issued and enforced, the hearing ex-
aminer was called upon to balance
NEMA’s need for the material
sought against the burden that
would be imposed upon the BLS by
requiring the production of such ma-
terial. NEMA agrees* that** this is
the issue presented. * * *
“It clearlybeingappears that
what is balanced is the pos-
sibility that NEMA may be able to
find some reporting or tabulating
mistakes in this survey on the one
hand, and an end to all of the useful
work of the BLS * * * on the
other hand.”
The Secretary also rejected NEMA’sat-
tack on the reliability of the survey’s
wage conclusions. He said:
survey“Sinceallof the errors in the BLS
hearingwhichwerewerecorrected,establishedtheprinci
pal remaining issue is whether the
evidence warrants the assumption
that they are indicative of the exist-
ence of others, or whether these
eight changes onlyconstituted a basis
for making minor improvements in
a survey which was substantially ac-
curate to begin with. The latter as-
sumption appears to be warranted.
The member companies in the Mo-
tors and Generators section of NE-
hearingMAwho were represented at the
included the leadinggeneratorsmanu-
facturers of motors and
and their attempt to obtain informa-
tionpearscriticalofthe BLS survey ap-
to have been both diligent and
extensive. NEMA has repeatedly as-
serted that it does not question the
technical competence with which the
survey was executed. It claims in-
stead that the difficulties arose
through the respondents’ errors in
e comprehending the meaning of the
questions in the wage survey, par-
ticularly with respect to the defini-
tion of covered workers. However,
a comparison of the definition in the
survey, the revised definition used
in the engines and turbines indus-
try wage questionnaire, and the
NEMA definition indicates that all
three versions are readily compre-
hensible.employeesThedefinitionof covered
generators usedquestionnaireinthemotorsand
successfully used in hasyearsbeen
wage surveys of manyrecentotherindus-in
tries, including several divisions of
the electrical industry, which, like
motors and generators, were being
covered for the first time by special
wage determinations. The occupa-
tional composition of these indus-
tries is similar in complexity and
the management is of comparable
gal sophistication. The major mo-le-
tor and generator manufacturers,
including those whose representa-
tives submitted affidavits or testified
at the hearing, have had long exper-
ience in supplying the Government
-atthewithvast quantities of materials,
and must have had a general aware-
ness thoughofWalsh-Healey regulations,
even no wage determination
applied specifically to motors and
generators. Moreover,some of these
same companieswagetook an active part
in other determination pro-
ceedings.
“Nevertheless, it is widely recog-
nized that some degree of reporting
error is inherent in any statistical
survey. The risk is, however, re-
duced to a minimum by the stand-
ard practice of BLS to review care-
fully and evaluate each response for
internal consistency and subsequent-
ly to contact the company either
through additional correspondence,
telephone calls, or personal visits,

on all doubtful matters. Further-
more, it is not clear that any altera-
tions in the BLS survey question-
naire would have resulted in a more
accurate survey of the industry than
the one presented in the record. In
fact, NEMA in effect admits that
the responses which it obtained from
the survey questionnaire which it
composed were of no greater accur-
acy than it believed the BLS re-
sponses to be.

“Based upon a careful evaluation
of all the evidence of record I find
that the BLS survey constitutes a
sound basis for determining the
minimum wages that prevail in this
industry.”
wage by the
The determinations made
Secretary11 were based soley on the sum-
mary tabulations; at no time did he (or
the Hearing Examiner) consult the un-
derlying survey data.
We are faced with two separate, but
related, issues: whether — in the face

11. The Secretary found that on the sur­
rey date the prevailing minimum wage in
the fractional branch of the industry was
$1.45 per hour and in the non-fraetional
branch it was $1.70 an hour. These fig­
ures were each increased 3 cents an hour
to cover wage increases occurringhearingbe­
tween the survey date and the
date.
12. See IV Wigmobe on Evidence § 1230
(3d ed. 1940) ; Powhatan Mining Co. v.
Ickes, 118 F.2d 105, 107 (6th Cir. 1941);
Augustine v. Bowles, 149 F.2d 93, 96
(9th Cir. 1945); Willapoint Oysters,
Inc. v. Ewing, 174 F.2d 676, 691752,(9thCir.
1949). See, also, S.Rep. No. 79th
Cong., 1st Sess. (1945), printed in Ad­
MINISTBATIVE PBOCEDTIEE ACT, LEGIS­
LATIVE Histobt, Sen.Doc. 248, 79th
■Cong., 2d Sess. 185 at 208-09 (1944r-­
1946) (hereafter referred to as “Legis.
Hist.“* APA”):**
subject to the appropriate
safeguards, technical data may as a
matter of convenience be reduced to
writing and introduced as in courts.
* * * To the extent that cross-ex-
amination is necessary to bring out the
truth, the party should have it. Also,
an adequate opportunity must be pro-
525

of the receipt in evidence of the sum-
mary wage tabulations with the refusal
to produce or to permit inspection of the
answered questionnaires or to disclose
the names of the 216 establishments tab-
ulated — the administrative hearing af-
forded the appellees the opportunity “to
submit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct
such cross-examination as may be re-
quired for a full and true disclosure of
the facts,” within the meaning of Section
7(c) of the Administrative Procedure
Act, supra', and whether, in light of the
evidence offered by appellees in an effort
to impeach the survey, the determination
was “supported by and in accordance
with the reliable, probative, and sub-
stantial evidence” under Section 7(e) or
must be set aside under Section 10(e)
(B) of that statute as “unsupported by
substantial evidence.” As already noted,
under Section 7(c) the Secretary, the
proponent of the wage determination,
had the burden of proof at the hearing.
There is of course no question
as to the admissibility of the summary
tabulations compiled by the Bureau.12

vided for a party to prepare and submit
appropriate rebuttal evidence.”
H.R.ítep. No. 1980, 79th Cong., 2d Sess.,
is substantially the same, see Legis.Hist.
APA 233, 271, although it addsreportsthatthe
words “technical data” include of
Attorneysurveysandsummaries. And see the
General’s Manual (1947)ontheAd-
ministrative“***ProcedureitisclearActthatthe‘rightat77:to
present his case or defense by oral or
documentary evidence’ does not extend
to presenting evidence in affidavit or
other written form so as to deprive
the agency or opposingcross-examination,partiesofop-
portunity for nor
so as to force them to assume the ex-
pense of calling the affiants for cross-
examination. See Powhatan Mining
Co. v. Ickes, 118 F.2d 105, 109 (6th
Cir. 1941).
“Of course, the agency may, if it
desires, receive such written evidence
as it determines would tend to be re-
liable and probative and the admission
of which would not *prejudicially** de-
prive other parties of op-
portunity for cross-examination. Thus,
technical and statistical data may he
introduced in convenient written
form subject to adequate opportuni-

526
But it is also the general requirement
that where tables of this kind are re-
ceived in evidence, the documents sup-
porting the tables and on which they
are based must also be introduced or at
least be made available to the opposing
party to the extent that they are neces-
sary for purposes of rebuttal and cross-
examination.13 We think that the stat-
ute which placed the burden on the Sec-
retary and gave appellees a right to rebut
and cross-examine with a view to a full
and true disclosure of the facts clearly
would require that the general rule be
applied here, unless the fact that the
questionnaire answers were obtained un-
der a pledge of confidentiality compels a
different rule — an issue which will be
considered presently. Putting that issue
to one side for the moment, we think
our conclusion that at least some dis-
closure is required is compellingly sup-
ported by the decision in Powhatan
Mining Co. v. Ickes, 118 F.2d 106 (6th
Cir. 1941), which reviewed an order of
the Director of the Bituminous Coal Di-
vision of the Department of the Interior
refusing changes in the minimum prices
for coal set by him. Producing com-
panies were required to file prices and
other information relating to spot or-
ders for coal under a statute which pro-
vided that the information be held con-
fidential within the Division. From this

ty for oi'oss-eccaminaHon and rebut-
tal. Sen.Rep. p. 42, H.R.Rep. p. 37
(Sen.Doe. pp. 228, 271).” (Emphasis
supplied.)

13. See authorities cited in footnote 12.
And see Handbook oe Recommended
Pkocedue.es bob the Tbial ob Pko-
teacted Oases, Adopted by the Judicial
Conference of the United States (1960),
stating“*at* p.*71:
The underlying data, to-
gether with the proposed exhibits 'or
summary testimony, should be made
available to opposing counsel sufficient-
ly in advance of the time they are to
be offered to permit all objections to
be raised and, if possible, resolved pri-
or to the offer. Underlying data should
not in the ordinary case be placed in
evidence.“
* * * It is not necessary to place
in evidence all data underlying the sum-
data tabulations were prepared and re-
ceived in evidence. Petitioners demand-
ed that the tables be decoded so that, for
purposes of cross-examination, they
would know the identity of the producers
who made the sales and other facts sur-
rounding the transactions. The court
held that “in all fairness the data should
have been disclosed” (118 F.2d at 108),
saying (118 F.2d at 109):

“It is difficult to see how the ac-
curacy, authenticity and relevancy
of these tabulations could be tested
in any way without the disclosure of
the names of the code members who
reported the data upon which the
tabulations are based. The tabula-
tions were compiled from data which
was kept secret, but which was in
the possession of the Division. Er-
rors in computation could not be
checked unless they appeared upon
the face of the tabulation, and the
real meaning of the figures could
not be developed unless the character
of the individual* * sales* could be in-
quired into. when the Di-
vision introduces the tabulations, the
evidence is put in at its instance and
the petitioners should be given the
opportunity to cross-examine as to
the weight and authenticity of the
figures. * * *

marization if the opposing parties have
had adequate and reasonable opportunity
to test the authenticity of the underly-
ing data and the fairness and accuracy
of the summary, and have raised no ob-
jection on these grounds. If objections
on these grounds are noted by the op-
posing party they should he presented
and, if possible, disposed of prior to the
time when the summarization is to be
offered into evidence. Only such of the
underlying documents necessary to pre-
serve the objections raised should be
made part of the record.” (Footnote
omitted.)
Here of course, as already noted, NEMA,
and through it the appellees, was refused
access to the underlying data prior to
the hearing, even under its pledge of
secrecy, and its effort to procure access
to the data at the hearing was also de-
nied.

“ * * * the Division’s em-
ployees made the tabulations from
material to which it had full access,
from material ordered by statute to
be held ‘confidential,’ and hence
withheld from petitioners. The Di-
vision introduced the tabulations as
evidence, and objected to giving in-
formation which was essential* * for*
proper cross-examination.
we have seen no other instance in
which such an administrative agency
[one in which executive and quasi-
judicial functions are merged] has,
by adopting rules which provide for
tabulations based on secret material
within its own possession, created
evidence to be used against parties
to a controversy before the admin-
istrative agency, and has ruled that
the evidence cannot be attacked by
the ordinary methods of cross-exam-
ination.
“We think that this procedure vio-
lates the essential canons of fairness
laid down by the**Supreme* Court
[citing cases]. We are un-
able to see how there has been a full
hearing unless the right to cross-
examine has been afforded.
“ * * *
The exhibits are admis-
sible under the broad rule that ad-
ministrative agencies are not bound
by the ordinary rules of evidence.
All the more scrupulous should be
the effort on the part of the agency
to extend to the litigant the right to

14. See also Willapoint Oysters, Inc. v.
Ewing, 174 F.2d 676 (9th Cir. 1949).
There the court held (174 F.2d pp. 691-­
692) that it was not reversible error to
admit in evidence in an administrative
proceeding a summary tabulation but to
exclude the worksheets upon which the
tabulation was based where “Petitioner
had adequate access to these worksheets
and utilized the information gained there­
from for its cross-examination.” Supra,
174 F.2d at 691.
Here, the Secretary says that the data
was not needed for cross-examination
since “the reporting businessmen did not
testify” and because the BLS expert
“could not testify as to possible errors
527
test evidence thus admitted by the
fullest possible cross-examination.”
While this language was not used against
the background of a contention that dis-
closure would significantly undermine the
investigatory abilities of the agency—
since the statute compelled coal compa-
nies to submit the information — it dem-
onstrates that denial of all access to any
part of the list of companies or any of
the questionnaire answers is a denial
to appellees of an opportunity to rebut
and cross-examine with respect to the
tabulations.14 The Secretary attempts to
distinguish the Powhatan case on the
ground that “appellees have no vested in-
terest” in Government contracting policy.
This is irrelevant to the point. With re-
spect to the minimum wage determina-
tion involved here, appellees have a stat-
utory right to a hearing, including the
right “to submit rebuttal evidence, and
to conduct such cross-examination as may
be required for a full and true disclosure
of the facts.”
Much has been argued to us about the
confidential nature of the BLS survey,
and the damage that disclosure of the
data received would cause to the procure­
ment of information in the future for
minimum wage determinations and for
important economic investigations in
other areas. The Secretary rejects ap­
pellees’ argument that the subpoena pow­
er could effectively achieve the results
obtained by solicitation under a pledge
of confidentiality,15 and denies that in
camera disclosure would be consistent

by the responding businessmen.” But
this does not answer the point satisfac-
torily. The data used as a basis for the
wage conclusions was not corroborated,
and furnishing the data in a sense would
serve some of the functions of cross-ex-
amination. Moreover, it certainly was
pertinent to the problem of preparing
and submitting “appropriate rebuttal evi-
dence” (see footnote 12, supra), includ-
ing possible witnesses among the report-
ing businessmen, who if hostile might be
subjected to cross-examination.
Hearing
15. It would seem that the Ex-
aminer would have authority to obtain
the needed .data .by subpoena. See Sec-

528

with the pledge. All of this may be quite
true. We are not without sympathy for
the problems faced by the Secretary, but
we have found nothing in the Walsh-Hea-
ley Act, the Fulbright Amendment, the
Administrative Procedure Act or any
other legislation that has been called to
our attention which would empower us
to release the Secretary from conforming
to the procedural commands of the con-
trolling statutes because of such consid-
erations. Nor do we find any opinions
of the Supreme Court or of this court
which suggest that the difficulties ad-
vanced by the Secretary excuse him from
fulfilling what appear to be his statutory
obligations to appellees.16
Indeed, cases such as Greene v. Mc­
Elroy, 360 U.S. 474, 79 S.Ct. 1400, 3 L.­
Ed.2d 1377 (1959); Roviaro v. United
States, 353 U.S. 53, 77 S.Ct. 623, 1 L.­
Ed.2d 639 (1957);­17 Jencks v. United
States, 353 U.S. 657, 77 S.Ct. 1007, 1 L.­
Ed.2d 1103 (1957); and Communist

tion 6(c) of the Administrative Proce­
dure Act, 5 U.S.C.Corp.§1005(c)Perkins,;cf.Endi­
501,cottJohnson 339, v. 317(1943).U.S.
63 S.Ct. 87 L.Ed. 424
16. In Norwegian Nitrogen Products Co. v.
United States, 288 U.S. 294, 53 S.Ct.
350, 77 L.Ed. 796 (1933), the Supreme
Court held that a foreign company, par­
ticipating in a statutory hearing before
the Tariff Commission to determine the
relative costs of American and foreign
companies for purposes of the import
duty, and refusing to disclose its own
cost data, was not entitled to disclosure
of cost data submitted by its competitors
to the Commission under a pledge of
secrecy. The statute there gave no
right to cross-examination. The case has
little relevance for our case where a
right to a hearing with full right of
cross-examination is given by the Pul­
bright Amendment and the Administra­
ManufacturingtiveProcedureAct.Nor is Red Star
App.D.C. 244, Co. v. Grimes, 95 U.S.­
any appellant.221F.2d524 (1954), of
aid to that, That case turned
on the fact under the statute in­
volved, Puerto Rican industries had no
right to the disclosure of the identity of
two mainlandcomparedfirmswhose wage costs
were with similar costs of
Puerto Rican firms in an economic re­
port received in evidence. The appellees
here, to the extent they are aggrieved,
Party of the United States v. Subversive
Activities Control Board, 102 U.S.App.­
D.C. 395, 254 F.2d 314 (1958),18 suggest
strongly that ordinarily the Government
cannot take action adverse to a citizen,
in an administrative decision aimed di­
rectly at him or his group, without dis­
closing the evidence on which it relies.
It does not follow, however, that
courts will generally force the Govern­
ment to reveal information it seeks to
keep confidential. The Government, in
situations of the present sort, has an op­
tion: it can hold back confidential ma­
terial, and take the risk of not being able
to prove its ease, or it can produce the
material and allow it to be the subject
of direct and cross-examination. There
are, of course, occasions when a court
will order the Government to break its
pledge of confidentiality and produce its
files for inspection. For example, in Boe­
ing Airplane Co. v. Coggeshall, 108 U.S.­
App.D.C. 106, 280 F.2d 654 (1960), the

have of course the full right, accorded by
statute, to test the validity of the wage
determination by cross-examination.
17. Roviaro was concerned with whether
an informeranonymous.astoanalleged crime could
remainprejudicial In holding that it
was identity,errorforthetrialcourt
to withhold his the Court said:
respect“Webelieve that no justifiable.fixedrulewith
problem to disclosure is balancingThe
publicis one that callsprotectingfor
the interest inagainst the
flow of information the indi­
vidual’s right to prepare his defense.
Whether a proper balance renders non­
disclosure erroneous must depend on
the particular** circumstances of each
case 353 U.S. at 62, 77 S.­
Ct. at 628.
18. In the Communist Party case, this
court required the Government to pro-
duce “confidential” reports where the
party who prepared the reports testified
as to their subject matter. We said:
“That the documents are merely con-
fidential does not protect them against
compulsory disclosure. Of course this
does not mean such documents must be
produced upon every demand; good
cause for intrusion into confidential files
and materiality and relevancy must be
shown. The law in that area is well
settled.” 102 U.S.App.D.C. at 402, 254
F.2d at 321.

Tax Court subpoenaed the Renegotiation
Board for its files in a matter involving
the Boeing Company. It was claimed
that the material therein was privileged,
and that disclosure of material received
from persons outside the Board would
make them reluctant to submit data in
the future. We said (108 U.S.App.D.C.
at 113, 280 F.2d at 661) :
“The likelihood seems slight that in
the future persons outside the
Board, be they other public officials
or private persons, will avoid provid-
ing the Board with all information
requested if production of docu-
ments *is *judicially* ordered in this
case. The Board’s own reg-
ulations protect these persons, in all
non-judicial circumstances, against
voluntary disclosure of information
by the Board. Contractors are in
fact obliged under pain of criminal
sanction to supply information re-
quested by the Board. Thus, we are
not concerned with a situation where
the Government depends on volun-
teered information from private cit-
izens.”
We gave substantial weight to the fact
that the Tax Court had decided to issue
the subpoena, and we ordered it enforced
to the extent indicated in our opinion, re-
lying largely on the fact that the Govern-
ment was attempting to collect money
from the Boeing Company but had de-
nied it the materials necessary to its
defense.
Again, in Machin v. Zuckert, 114 U.S.­
App.D.C. 335, 316 F.2d 336, cert. denied,
375 U.S. 896, 84 S.Ct. 172, 11 L.Ed.2d 124
(1963), we sustained in part a claim of
privilege asserted by the Secretary of
the Air Force. We did, however, require
him to disclose certain information which
had been obtained without assurances of
confidentiality. But the case has little

19. In some cases survey conclusions alone
may be sufficient, but their essentially
“borderline” quality should not be over-
looked. Before being tabulated, ques-
tionnaire responses must undergo evalu-
ative, classificatory and statistical proc-
529
relevance here. The underlying litiga-
tion was a suit between private parties,
with the Government not directly in-
volved. We were exercising the tradi-
tional function of the courts in such a
situation to see that the fullest possible
evidence, consistent with any privilege
which the Government could properly
claim, was made available for the proper
decision of the controversy. Our deci-
sions in the Machín and Boeing cases
would not justify us in ordering the pro-
duction of the confidential filesof the Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics in cases of the
present type.
We must necessarily conclude that the
admission of the wage tabulations com-
piled from undisclosed confidential data,
as to which we will not compel disclo-
sure, failed to accord to appellees the
adequate opportunity for rebuttal and
cross-examination that the Congress pre-
scribed. But this does not entirely dis-
pose of the matter.

On the record before us, we could
sustain the minimum wage determina­
tion only if the wage tabulations, used as
the sole basis for the determination,
themselves meet the requirements of “re­
liable, probative and substantial evi­
dence.” Where impeaching evidence of
probative worth is introduced, however,
the precarious structure upon which the
Bureau’s tabulations rest must topple,
unless it is reinforced. Although there
may be cases where this is not so,19here
we are obliged to conclude that sufficient
impeaching evidence has been adduced as
to require that the wage tables received
in evidence be bolstered by some reliable
supporting evidence.
In the instant case, the appellees
mounted a strong attack on the reliability
of the survey. As we have seen, after
receiving the Bureau’s tabulations, ap-

esses. The summary of the responses
may include errors in tabulation, as well
as errors occurring in the processes just
mentioned. The questions asked must
also be clear and not subject to misun-
derstanding.

530
pellees made a limited survey in the short
time remaining before the hearing and
discovered alleged errors in the tabula-
tions.20 Two of these were accepted by
the Bureau and caused changes in the
wage conclusions reached in the tables.
During the hearing appellees submitted
evidence, in the form of affidavits and
testimony of company officials, which re-
sulted in additional downward modifica-
tions of the Bureau’s minimum wage
estimates. The total effect of the eight
reductions accepted by the21 Bureau was
by no means de minimis
We need not try to review or evaluate
the evidence as to other alleged errors in
given to BLS and presum-
the answers tabulations,
ably included in its or as to
answers resulting from an alleged misun-
derstanding of the questions asked by
BLS. Suffice it to say that the evidence
in this case, which we have not detailed,
leads to an inescapable inference that the
definition of “covered worker” in the
BLS questionnaire could have been wide-
ly, if not universally, misunderstood, and

20. Appellees’ trade association NEMA, al-
though unaware of the identity of all of
the plants studied by BLS, contacted
some members of the industry for pur-
poses of a survey. Seventy-two of those
contacted forwarded to NEMA copies
of what purported to be the questionnaire
answers submitted by them to BLS. Six-
ty-one of the seventy-two establishments
also answered the association’s own ques-
tionnaire.
supplemental
21.disputedAsthematerial facts stated:statementofun-
“Evidence offered by industry and re-
ceived at the hearing established that
the originals of said ‘statisticalwhich,wage
tables’ contained errors before
correction, would have resulted in a de-
cision by defendant higher than the
prevailing byminimum wage actually de-
termined three cents an hour in the
‘fractional branch’ and four cents an
hour in the ‘non-fraetionalgeneratorsbranch’ind
the motors and wage
This evidence related to the and
employment data of only eight of the
216 establishments but involved a sig-
nificant percentage of the 53,176 ‘cov-
ered workers’ whose data are con-”
tained in said ‘statistical wage tables.’
that the answers given, apart from the
errors found by the appellants in their
limited survey, could have been erroneous
in several respects.22 In view of the evi-
dence casting serious doubt on the valid-
ity of the Bureau’s survey results, it was
certainly incumbent upon the Bureau, if
it meant to rely on the survey, to offer
some evidence in rebuttal of the attack.
The Secretary, however, offered nothing
tending to substantiate the accuracy and
reliability of the underlying data. For
these reasons the Secretary’s determina-
tion must be set aside for the further
reason that it is not supported by “re-
liable, probative, and substantial evi-
dence.” 23
Whether the wage conclusions result-
ing surveys might
from confidential in
other cases stand if no impeaching evi-
dence were offered or if some rehabilitat-
ing evidence were given, and how much
disclosure, if any, may be necessary in
other cases to support the survey con-
clusions are questions we do not now pur-
port to decide.24 Nor are we concerned

22. The Secretary’s witnesses conceded that
(a) thequestionnairedefinitionof“coveredworkers”
on the did not include some
employee classes that should have been
included, and (b) that there was a “dis-
tinct possibility” that companiesmight an-
swering the questionnairecategories have ex-
cluded relevant of workers.
Further, NEMA procured comparative
data as to only 61 of the 216 establish-
ments tabulated, or somethingfindinglessthan
one-third of the bytotal, 8suggestserrors
conceded as such BLS. This
thatestablishments,onthesameratioof8errorstoeach
61eredby NEMA maythehaveerrorsamountedundiscov-toat
least 20.

23. In view of this conclusion,Secretary’sweneednot
reach or discuss the underlyingargumentquestion-
that disclosure of the Reports
naires would violate1079,theFederal
Act.(b) See 56 Stat. 5 U.S.C. § 139b
ustry.of .
may, however, suggest
24. Our discussion
the desirability of efforts to bring the
AValsh-Healey Act and the Administra-
tive Procedure Act into more complete
harmony.

with minimum wage determinations in
other industries which may be now out-
standing and in effect. Our opinion is
not to be construed as affecting them,
either directly or collaterally. All we de-
cide is that under all the circumstances
presented, we cannot find that the Sec-
retary’s determination of the prevailing
minimum wage in this ease is supported
by substantial evidence in a record made
in compliance with the statute’s proce-
dural commands.
II.
The Question Standing to Sue. The
of
pertinent provision of Section 10 of the
Walsh-Healey Act, supra, is that “any
person adversely affected or aggrieved”
by a minimum wage determination may
have review thereof.25 The Secretary
asserts that none of the appellees showed
themselves to be adversely affected or
aggrieved and hence that none has stand­
ing to sue. Appellees urge, on the other
hand, that the statute conferred standing

25. To“quote tlie statute:
* * any person adversely af-
fected or aggrieved thereby, who shall
be deemed to include anymaterials,manufacturersu
of, or regular dealer in, purchased
plies, articlespurchasedorequipmentby
or to anybesource, the Governmentany
fromtry whowageisin indus-
applicable.”towhichsuch determination
is
26. In Associated Industries of New York
State v. Ickes, 134 F.2d 694 (2d Cir.),
vacated for mootness, 320 U.S. 707, 64
S.Ct. 74, 88 L.Ed. 414 (1943), the appli­
cable statute authorized suit by persons
“aggrieved.” The court found that since
petitioners, as consumers of coal, came
within that description, they had stand­
ing to challenge the lawfulness of the
administrative order increasing the mini­
mum price of bituminous coal. In Reade
v. Ewing, 205 F.2d 630 (2d Cir. 1953),
the court found that petitioners, as con­
sumers, were “adversely affected” under
the relevant statute, and could thusallowingchal­
lenge an administrative order
margarinecertainingredientsindicatingtobeusedinole-­
without the source
on the label.v. Federal Bros.CommunicationsRadioSt
tion,Commission309U.S.470,Sanders476-477,60S.Ct.693,
531

upon them whether or not they were in
fact adversely affected or aggrieved.
We think that, as the language of
Section 10 clearly states, Congress au­
thorized only persons adversely affected
or aggrieved by a minimum wage deter­
mination to have review thereof in a Fed­
eral court. The cases cited by appellees
do not point to a contrary result,26 and
our own decisions, as will be seen, sup­
port such a holding.27 Indeed, serious
constitutional difficulties might be pre­
sented if the present statute were found
to “confer” standing on manufacturers
not in fact adversely affected.28
In Mitchell v. Covington Mills, 97 U.S.­
App.D.C. 165, 229 F.2d 506 (1955), cert.
denied, 350 U.S. 1002, 76 S.Ct. 546, 100
L.Ed. 865 (1956), a case brought by two
groups of manufacturers challenging the
Secretary of Labor’s determination un­
der the Walsh-Healey Act, this court or­

dered the District Court to determine-­
which of the plaintiffs had standing.

84 L.Ed. 869 (1940), held that Congress
had validly authorized parties who were
aggrieved or adversely affected to ap-
p- peal an order of thegrantingFederalCommunica-
tions Commission a license.
27. In other contexts the requirement of
“adversity” has been interpreted rather
broadly. See, for example, Adler v.
Board of Education, 342 U.S. 485, 72 S.­
Ct. 380, at 387, 96 L.Ed. 517 (1952),
and dissenting 497;opinionof Mr. Justice
Frankfurter at Federal Communi­
cationsStation,Commissionsupra;v.SandersBros.Ra­
dio Federal Communica­
tions Commission v. National Broadcast­
ing Co., 319 U.S. 239, 63 S.Ct. 1035, 87
L.Ed. 1374 (1943). See also National
Coal Association v. Federal 135,Power137-138,Com­
mission, 89 U.S.App.D.C.
191 F.2d 462, 464-465 (1951); As­
sociatedIckes,Industriessupra;ofNewEwing,Yorksupra;State
v. Jaffe, StandingReadetov.Secure Judicial
andVirtues,The Supreme Court, 1960 Term,
Rev. 255 (1961).
See, Bickel,
28. generally, Actions, The Habv.L.,Passive-
Review: Private40, (1961),75 Davis,.
75StandingHabv.L.Rev.toChallenge44 and Ac-
a­ tion, 39 Minn.L.Rev. 353,Government428(1955).

532
Judge Danaher, concurring, wrote (97
U.S.App.D.C. at 170, 229 F.2d at 511),
“those who properly may he parties are
those, and only those, who can show
themselves by direct and immediate in-
jury to have been adversely affected or
aggrieved by the Secretary’s determina-
tion.” Similarly, in George v. Mitchell,
108 U.S.App.D.C. 324, 327, 282 F.2d 486,
489 (1960), we said, in reference to the
provision now under consideration, “only
persons adversely affected or aggrieved
are accorded standing.” 29
Ruth Elkhorn Coals v. Mitchell, 101
U.S.App.D.C. 313, 248 F.2d 635 (1957),
cert. denied, 355 U.S. 953, 78 S.Ct. 539,
2 L.Ed.2d 530 (1958), does not support
appellees’ contention that mere member­
ship in an industry to which the Secre­
tary’s wage determination applies, and
from which the Government purchases
or is to purchase supplies, is sufficient,
without more, to confer standing under
Section 10(b). In that case, a group of
bituminous coal companies sought to in­
validate a minimum wage determination
by the Secretary of Labor on the ground
that the industry came within the “open
market” exemption of the statute. We
said that the plaintiffs “by the very
terms of section 10(b) are persons ad­
versely affected or aggrieved, and as such
are given by that section the right to
obtain judicial review of the wage de­
termination and its applicability, even
though they have not entered into a con­
tract with the Government to supply
bituminous coal.” 101 U.S.App.D.C. at
315-316, 248 F.2d 637-638. We so de­
cided in the light of the allegations of
the complaint in that case, which were

29. Plaintiffs there sued under Subsection
(c) to obtain a declaratory judgment that
existing contracts to which they were
parties were not within the coverage
of the Act, contrary to the adverse find-
ing of the Secretary of Labor. We held
that they had standing under that pro-
vision.
30. The plaintiffs there alleged in their
complaint:“
* * * If the Plaintiffs shall be
required to comply with the terms of
the aforesaid Determination they loill
he required to increase not only their
taken as true on the Secretary’s motion
for summary judgment, that the plain-
tiffs each were paying a lower wage than
that found by the Secretary30 to be the
“prevailing minimum.” Ruth Elkhorn
Coals is thus entirely in harmony with
our holdings in the Covington Mills and
George cases that plaintiffs must be ad-
versely affected in order to have stand-
ing to sue.
It statutory
guage is clear that the lan­
saying that persons adversely af­
fected shall be deemed to include “any
manufacturer”, et cetera,31 was inserted
for the purpose of specifically negating
the Supreme Court’s holding in Perkins
v. Lukens Steel, supra, and was not in­
tended to confer standing upon every
manufacturer or dealer in an industry,
whether or not he was adversely affected
by a wage determination. Senator Ful­
bright, in explaining the purpose of his
amendment, said:
“The second part of my amend-
ment provides for judicial review, to
be available to contractors, unions,
and employees as a protection
against arbitrary actions of the Sec-
retary of Labor. It is made neces-
sary by the decision of the Supreme
Court in the Lukens steel case. This
case held that courts have no juris-
diction since no rights of the con-
tractors were involved— doing busi-
ness with the Government32was a
privilege and not a right.” (Em-
phasis supplied.)
Thus, the amendment was intended to
bestow litigable rights upon those who
need “protection against arbitrary ac-

prevailing minimum wage rates
* * * but all their wage rates both
for government and non-government
business.” (Emphasis supplied.)
It is thus quite clear, on the basis of
this allegation and others which we have
not quoted, that each of the plaintiffs
was paying less than the amount found
by the Secretary to be the prevailing
minimum wage.
31. See fn. 25, supra.

32. 98 Cohg.Rec. 6246, May 29, 1952. See,
also, 98 Cong.Rec. 6531, June 4, 1952.

tions,” i. e., as the statute says, those ad-
versely affected or aggrieved. specificallyMa
turers and suppliers were
mentioned in the statute in orderholdingtore
ject clearly the Supreme Court’s
that notwithstanding an adverserights.effec
these parties had no litigable
In the instant case, the com­
plaint alleges that appellees Bodine Elec­
tric Company, Lamb Electric, a Division
of Ametek, Inc., and Peerless Electric
Division of H. K. Porter Company, Inc.,
wages
are paying minimum equal to or
greater than those set by the Secretary
■of Labor. This seems to indicate that
these companies have no standingWalsh-Healeyt
under Section 10(b) of the compa­
Act. That theadverselyinterestsofsuch by
nies are not affected the
hypotheticalSecretary’sfindingisnotrebutted by the
they and remotelongpossibilityby that
will be hurt competitionintherun vir­at
tueahigherofincreasedwagerate.The directforlaborandim

mediate effect is to improve their com­
petitive position by raising the costs of
their competitors. Indeed, in Textile
Workers Union of America,401,CIO v. Allen­
dale (1955),Co.,96U.S.App.D.C. Covington226F.
Mills,765supra,andweinallowedMitchellfirmsv.paying
more than the amount found by the Sec­
retary to be the prevailing minimum to
Intervene on his side against firms con­
tending that his determination was too
high.
The complaint alleges that the remain-
ing appellees pay minimum wages less
than the amount determined by the Sec-
retary to be the prevailing minimum
wage. This would seem to indicate prima

33. Ruth Elkhorn Coals v. Mitchell, supra.
Cf. Associated Industries of New York
State v. Ickes, supra, and Reade v.
Ewing, supra, finding that petitioners had
standing by virtue of their status as
consumers of the relevant product, even
though specificprior purchases were not
established.

34. The Secretary cites United States v.
L. A. Tucker Truck Lines, 344 U.S. 33,
36-37, 73 S.Ct. 67, 97 L.Ed. 54 (1952),
533
facie at least that they have standing to
nufac-havereview of the determination. The
fact that some of them may not previous-
- ly have entered into Government con-
tracts should not affect their standing.33
t The foregoing discussion is based on
the plaintiffs’ allegations below. In view
of the factual contentions raised by the
Secretary, challenging the substantiality
of plaintiffs’ claims of injury, we deem it
bydesirable to have an articulated decision
the DistrictpartiesCourt,after hearing fur­
ther from the on the question of
standing, declaring which plaintiffs (if
any) have standing, and which do not.
Mitchell v. Covington Mills, 97 U.S.App.­
osueD.C. 165, 168, 229 F.2d1002,506,509 (1955),546,
cert. denied, 350(1956);U.S. 76 S.Ct.
100 L.Ed. 865 cf. Commission,B.F.Good­
rich Co. v. Federal Trade
93 U.S.App.D.C.again50, 208F.2d 829 (1953).
Weclosewill refer opinion.to this matter at
the of this
­ III.

The Scope of the Remedy. The Secre-
tary urges that this suit was not main-
tainable as a class action, saying that it
does not meet the requirements of Fed.
2d R.ClV.P.23(a). Appellees claim, on the
other hand, that their suit was within
those requirements, having been brought
“on behalf of themselves and all other
United States manufacturers of electric
motors and generators similarly situat-
ed.” We think it is unnecessary, how-
ever, to enter into this controversy, for
the reasons which follow.34
It is no doubt true that some forms of
litigation directed against administra-
tive rules and orders can immediately

and International Ass’n of Machinists v.
Street, 367 U.S. 740, 774, 81 S.Ct. 1784,
6 L.Ed.2d 1141 (1961), which he sug­
gests support the proposition that one
not a party to an administrative pro­
ceeding cannot complain of procedural er­
rors therein. Such a proposition would
have relevance, if at all,only to the class
action argument, which we find it un­
necessary to consider. It follows that a
discussion of these cases isalso unneces­
sary and irrelevant.

534
benefit only those persons who bring the
litigation. For example, if an alien suc-
cessfully attacks a directive that he be
deported, and obtains angroundorderenjoining
his deportation on the appliedthat the
administrative procedures were
defective, or that the governinggivenstatute
was misinterpreted, theprinciplesreliefannounc
onlybyto him. But the if it is the Su-
ed the court— at least
preme Court which speaks— should be
followedessentiallybytheadministratorinall casesAn
of similar character.
certainly if it is a lower courtordinarilywhich
spoken, that courttowouldany individual who
the same relief an essentially similar
comes to it withagainst the administra-
cause of action requires no less.
tor. The rule of law
In the present case, a court order en-
joining the Secretary’s determination for
the sole benefit of those plaintiffs-appel-
lees who have standing to sue would be
to give them an unconscionablebargain-
ing advantage over other firms in the in-
dustry. At least where the lowest-bidder
rule prevails, firms paying wages which
are the same as or higher than the levels
set competebytheSecretarysuccessfullywouldnotbeabl
to by withanyfirms re-t
lieved court order from need
pay wages at the level fixed by the Sec-
retary. The Government’sability to ob-
tain essential contracts might also be
hampered. At the very least, substantial
wage inequities among firms and em-
ployeesin the industry might be created,
based solely on the random application of
a wage determination held invalid as to
somebut not allmembers of the industry.
Congress could hardly have intended
any such result. Section 1(b) of the
Walsh-Healey Act was patently predi-
cated upon the principle that if a mini-
mum wage requirement was to be ap-
plied to an industry for Government con-
tract purposes, economic balance and
fairness required that all firms seeking
Government contracts in that industry
be subject to it.
Section 10(e) (B) of the Administra-
tive Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. § 1009(e)
(B), made applicable here by the Ful-
bright Amendment, provides that a re-
viewing court shall—
“Except so far as (1) statutes pre-
clude judicial review or (2) agency
action is by law committed to agen-
cy discretion * * * hold unlaw-
-runsful and set aside agency action, find-
ings, and conclusions found to be
* * * (4) without observance of
procedure required by law; (5) un-
d supported by substantial evidence in
any case subject to the requirements
givehasofsections 7 and 8 [of this Act]
* * (Emphasis supplied.)
Secretary’s wage deter-
The clearly minimum an agency
mination constitutes meaning
finding or conclusionwithin the
of this provision. Whether the court in
a particular case shouldagencyunderthis sec-
tion set aside the action in its
entirety or only in part, by reasonevidentiaryofde-
fects in procedure or lack of
support, must depend on the type of
agency action involved, the consequences
of granting the relief asked, and other
legal and equitable considerations.
e SecretaryHerethewage determination of the
o authoritywasquasi-legislative,delegatedmadeun-by
der the to him
Congress. He sought to establish a
broad rule, having the effect of a statute,
covering the employers and employeesof
an important branch of the electrical in-
dustry. Had Congress itself taken sim-
ilar action, by statute, and had that stat-
ute been held unconstitutional in an ap-
propriate suit, there is no doubt that it
would necessarily be regarded as uncon-
stitutional as to allpersons similarly sit-
uated, and not merely as to those who
brought the suit attacking it. Compare
Truax v. Raich, 239 U.S. 33, 38-39, 36
S.Ct. 7, 60 L.Ed. 131 (1915); Pierce v.
Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 45 S.Ct.
571, 69 L.Ed. 1070 (1925). A similar ap-
proach seems equally appropriate here.
Moreover, this is clearly a proceeding
in which those who have standing are;
here to vindicate the public interest in
having congressional enactments proper-

ly interpreted and applied.35 As we said
in Virginia Petroleum Jobbers Ass’n v.
Federal Power Commission, 104 U.S.­
App.D.C. 106, 109, 259 F.2d 921, 924
(1958):
“Parties aggrieved by administra-
tive agency orders act as representa-
tives of the public interest in seek-
ing judicial review. As it is princi-
pally the protection of the public in-
terest with which we are here con-
cerned, no artificial restrictions of
the court’s power to grant equitable
relief in the furtherance of that in-
terest can be acknowledged.”
Thus, we conclude that if one
or more of the plaintiffs-appellees is or
are found to have standing to sue, the
District Court should enjoin the effec­
tiveness of the Secretary’s determination
with respect to the entire industry.
The record is remanded to the District
Court, with instructions to resolve any
remaining factual issues with respect to
the standing to sue of the various plain­
tiffs-appellees, pursuant to Part II of
this opinion, and to supplement the rec­
ord by incorporating therein its findings
and conclusions on the subject of stand­
ing. This court will retain jurisdiction
to dispose of this appeal with finality,
when the supplemental record is returne­
d.36 We will maintain in force our pres­
ent stay of the District Court’s injunc­
tion, pending final disposition of the ap­
peal. See Beck v. Federal Land Bank of
Houston, 146 F.2d 623 (8th Cir. 1945);
Twin City Milk Producers’ Ass’n v. Mc­
Nutt, 122 F.2d 564 (8th Cir. 1941). Com­
pare Smith v. Pollin, 90 U.S.App.D.C.
178, 194 F.2d 349 (1952).

35. See, e. g., Scripps-Howard Radio, Inc.
v. Federal Communications Commission,
316 U.S. 4, 14-15, 62 S.Ct. 875, 86 L.Ed.
1229 (1942), and Reade v. Ewing, 205
F.2d 630, 632 (2d Cir. 1953).

36. If during the pendency of this appeal
the Secretary should desire to supplement
the record of his wage determination
hearing, in an effort to meet the defi-
■eiencies pointed out in this opinion, he
unay apply in the first instance to the
535
SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION, AFTER
REMAND
PER CURIAM:
Our decision of December 31, 1963, re-
manded the record to the District Court
for certain stated purposes. Proceedings
were held in accordance with our remand
order, and the District Court has now
returned the record with its findings and
conclusions on the question of standing,
and with its recommendation on pro-
posals which the Secretary submitted to
supplement the record.
The District Court concluded
that five of the plaintiffs-appellees, the
Baldor Electric Company, Holtzer-Cabot
Corporation, Westinghouse Electric Cor­
poration, Louis Allis Company, and
Northwestern Electric Company, have
standing. It based this conclusion on the
facts, as shown by affidavit, that each of
these five companies is a member of the
electric motors and generators industry ■
to which the minimum wage in issue ap-
plies, that each of the five has in the
past obtained or sought to obtain con­
tracts to supply electric motors and gen­
erators to the United States Govern­
ment, that each of the five has one or
more “covered employees” to whom it
pays wages lower than the Secretary’s
“prevailing minimum wage,”1 and thus
that each would have to raise wages in
order to enter into a contract covered by
the Walsh-Healey Act. The District
Court cited Ruth Elkhorn Coals, Inc. v.
Mitchell, 101 U.S.App.D.C. 313, 248 F.2d
635 (1957), cert. denied, 355 U.S. 953,
78 S.Ct. 539, 2 L.Ed.2d 530 (1958), for
the proposition that these facts gave
standing.

District Court, which shall consider the
application and refer it,with the Court’s
recommendations, to this court. Cf.
Smith v. Pollin, supra.

1. For purposes of this appeal we need not
consider whether a company may gain
standing by having “hiring” or “starting”
rates below the Secretary’s minimum
where it does not appear that any cov­
ered worker is actually paid at such
rates.

536
We agree. The wages they pay,
and their demonstrated interest in ob­
taining Government contracts, make it
clear that these five companies are threat­
ened with direct and immediate financialwag
injury if the Secretary’s minimum
is enforced. And the injury is equally
cognizable whether reflected in the in­
creased wage bill of a company continu­
ing to deal with the Government or in
the decision of a company to abandon
Government contracting because it can­
not or will not pay the higher wage bill.2
We conclude that the District Court cor­
rectly found the five companies named
above to have standing.
The District Court has recom­
mended that the Secretary’s proposals to
supplement the record, pursuant to foot­
note 36 of our December opinion, be re­
jected. We accept that recommenda­
tion, because it seems clear that the Sec­
retary’s proposals— which are set out in
an Appendix to this opinion— would nei­
ther strengthen the evidence supporting
the prior inadequate determination nor
afford any semblance of required proce­
dures.
In the first place, as appellant admits,
“It is now practically impossible to re-
liably check the accuracy of the original
survey as of the original payroll period
ending nearest October 15, 1960, because
of present unavailability of records, in-
adequacy of the recorded information, or
lack of proper recollection as to precisely
what the employees’ duties then were,
after the lapse of so long a period of
time.” We agree with appellees that “In-
formation of wages paid in 1964 cannot
reflect wages paid in 1960, nor support
administrative determinations based
solely on* summary* tabulations of 1960
wages *.” Moreover since the
Secretary’s order has never been lifted,
present wage levels have undoubtedly
been influenced by the imposition of the
invalid minimum wage determinations.
The proposals clearly contem­
plate a new determination rather than a

2. Nor is the injury rendered speculative
or remote, as the Government argues,
rehabilitation of the old one. Although
the Secretary may conduct proceedings;
to determine the present prevailing mini-
mum wage, if he abandons the old de-
e termination, we do not think he is en-
titled to keep it in effect until he can.
supersede it.
In any event, what the Sec­
retary proposes to introduce is essentially
a more carefully compiled version of the-­
same type of evidence that he intro­
duced before. He proposes to retain the-­
full pledge of confidentiality, and ap­
parently will release only summary
data compiled from wholly confidential
sources. It appears that he will withhold
not only the sources of specific informa­
tion but the identity of the plants in­
cluded in the survey. We need not say
how much disclosure must be afforded
to allow the opportunity for cross-exam­
ination required for a full and true de­
termination of the facts. But obviously
the amount of disclosure necessary is
inversely related to the initial strength
of the Secretary’s evidence, and the ex­
tent to which that evidence survives im­
peachment. Especially in light of the
sort of infirmities we found in the Secre­
tary’s current determination, we cannot
say that a proposed procedure which
gives not even a modicum of disclosure
affords the right of cross-examination
intended by the statute to protect the
interests of the companies and inspire
confidence that the Secretary’s deter­
mination is soundly based.
For the reasons stated, this court must
conclude that the challenged wage de-
termination must be struck down. The
injunction will, however, be stayed an
additional sixty days, to allow appellant
to seek review by the Supreme Court, if
he so desires. If he does so, the stay will
extend until the Supreme Court acts. If
the Supreme Court denies review, the in-
junction will become effective immediate-
ly thereon. This is without prejudice to
the initiation of new minimum wage pro-
ceedings— if the Secretary has not al-

by the possibilitythat a company’s wage
bill will be increased only slightly.

ready done so— consistent with the
requirements of the Administrative Pro-
cedure Act, made applicable by the Ful-
bright Amendment, and as now construed
in the two opinions of this court.
So ordered.

Appendix
Proposals of the defendant-appellant
Secretary of Labor to the District Court
on remand, pursuant to the suggestion
contained in footnote 36 of our opinion
of December 31, 1963,that he might wish
to supplement the record of his wage
determination hearing:

IFirst Proposal]
“[7.] (a) Representatives of the
Department of Labor’s Bureau of
Labor Statistics will personally visit
plants (establishments) included in
the October, 1960 survey that are
currently stillin business. They will
confer with the appropriate repre-
sentative (s) of the employer and
get the employer’sviewtogetherofthelowest
paiddescription‘covered’worker, with
a of that worker’s duties.
That description, and the wage rate
paid thatemployeeworker,willbe recorded.
paidIfthis is notplant’sthepayrolllo
workerrepresentativeonthe
thedescriptionBLS willofrecordeach
aemployee paidof thealowerdutiesrate,to-
gether with theatrate of pay. If the
representative is doubtful whether
or not any of these employees is
‘covered’,he will also record a de-
scription of the duties of the next
higher paid worker, or workers, to-
gether with their rates of pay, until
he reaches one as to whose ‘cover-
age’he has no doubt.
“(b) These data will be gathered
as of a workweek late in January or
early February 1964. The BLS rep-
resentatives will be furnished an
expanded and more complete defini-
tion of ‘coveredworkers’, prepared
by members of the Department’s
legal staff in Washington to meet the
537
objections tohearing.theearlierdefinition
voiced at the This expand-
ed and more completeplaintiffs’definitionwill
be submitted to counsel.
In light of any further objections
voiced by plaintiffs as to its inade-
quacy, the definition will be, to the
fullest possible extent, improved be-
fore the BLS representatives make
their visits to the plants.
“(c) These data will be reported
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics in
Washington for tabulation of the
wage information without disclo-
sure of the identity of the plants
from which the information was ob-
tained. Before the wage tables are
prepared, the recorded job descrip-
tions of allbytheseDepartment’sworkerswillbe
examined theexperts Pub-
lic‘coverage’Contracts on the Act’sof
to determine which
suchpaidlower paid workers is the low-
plant.est ‘covered’worker in each
“(d) wage
gether The jobtabulations,descriptionsto-
withpaidthe who, of
the lowest workers the De-
partmentby has Walsh-Healeydetermined,areAct,‘cov-
ered’ thejob descriptions anyas
west well aspaidthe whom theofDe-
partmentlower workers not ‘covered’,
will be madeexcludedavailableastoplaintiffs’
counsel. All objections raised will
be carefully considered. If correc-
tions are deemed required, they will
be made. The record of the supple-
mental proceedings conductedobjectionsinthis
matter will reflect allthe
raised and the action taken thereon
by defendant.
“(e) Upon the conclusionof these
supplemental proceedings defendant
will review this supplementary evi-
dence, and enter a supplementary
written order. If the supplementary
evidence shows that the minimum
wage rates now prevailing are at
least equal to the minimum rates es-
tablished by defendant’s challenged
minimum wage determination ($1.-

538
48 for the fractional branch of the
industry; $1.73 for the nonfrae-
tional branch of the industry),
defendant will direct that the chal-
lenged minimum wage determina-
tion remain in supplementaryfullforceande
fect. If this wageevi-
dence showsprevailingthattheminimum for
rates now are lower
eitherchallengedbranchoftheindustrywagethan
the minimumbranch, deter-
mination for that outstandingdefend
ant will revoke the
minimum wage determination for
that branch, and publish a new mini-
mum wage determination at the
minimum wage rates found to be
nowindustry.prevailingforthat branch of
the
opportunity“(f)Plaintiffswillbeafforded an
to apply to defendant
for reconsideration of this supple-
mentary written order. In light of
such representations as plaintiffs
may make, defendant will enter such
further writtenjudgmentorderappearsinthejust
proper.asinhis and

Proposal]
[Second
“8. Alternatively, defendant has
determined that, if the proposal for
supplemental proceedings outlined in
paragraph 7, above,is not acceptable
to the Court of Appeals, defendant
desires to be authorized, while the
Court of Appeals retains jurisdic-
tion over the cause to dispose of the
appeal with finality, to conduct an
entirely new survey, under a new
pledge of confidentiality, substan-
tially in the same manner as is set
forth in paragraph 7.hearing.Thiswould
include a new formal De-
fendant estimates that accomplish-
ment of the proposal set forth in
paragraph 7 would require approxi-
mately three to four months. Ac-
complishment of an entirely new
survey, hearing, etc., as alternative-
ly proposed, would require approxi-
mately nine months.”
COOPER, Appellant,
Vernon
v.
UNITED STATES of America,
Appellee.
f- Joseph KENNEDY, Appellant,
v.
UNITED STATES of America,
Appellee.
Nos. 17669, 17670.

- United States Court of Appeals
District of Columbia Circuit.
Argued March 17, 1964.
Decided April 9, 1964.
Petition for Rehearing en Banc
Denied Oct. 1, 1964.





Mr. Martin J. Gaynes, Washington,
D. C.,with whom Mr. Leonard H. Marks,
Washington, D. C. (both appointed by
matterthiscourt), was on the brief, for appel-
lant in No. 17,669.
Mr. William J. Garber, Washington,
D. C., for appellant in No. 17,670. Mr.
Monroe H. Freedman, Washington, D. C.
(appointed by this court), also entered
an appearance for appellant in No. 17,-
670.
Mr. David Epstein, Asst. U. S. Atty.,
withAtty.,whomMessrs. DavidQ. C.Acheson, U.
S. and Frank Nebeker and Al-
fred Hantman, Asst. U. S. Attys., were on
the brief, for appellee. Mr. Barry I.
Fredericks, Asst. U. S. Atty., also entered
an appearance for appellee.
Before Bastían, Burger and Wright,
Circuit Judges.

PER CURIAM.
Judgment
These on
easesappealscame to be heard on the
record on from the United States
District Court for the District of Colum-
bia, and were argued by counsel.
On Consideration Whereof, It is or-
dered and adjudged by this court that the