State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Dole — 802 F.2d 474 (D.C. Cir. 1986) — source: https://com-courtlistener-storage.s3.amazonaws.com/harvard_pdf/7903065.pdf

STATE FARM MUTUAL AUTOMOBILE
INSURANCE COMPANY, et
al., Petitioners,
v.
Elizabeth DOLE, Secretary of the
Department of Transportation, et
al.,Respondents.
AMERICAN INSURANCE
ASSOCIATION,
Petitioner,
v.
Elizabeth DOLE, Secretary of the Depart­
ment of Transportation; the Depart­
ment of Transportation; Diane Steed
Administrator of the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration; and t
National Highway Traffic Safety Ad
ministration, Respondents.
NATIONWIDE MUTUAL INSURANCE
COMPANY, Petitioner,
v.
Elizabeth DOLE, Secretary of the Depart­
ment of Transportation; the Depart­
ment of Transportation; Diane Steed
Administrator of the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration; and t
National Highway Traffic Safety Ad
ministration, Respondents.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF INSUR­
ANCE COMMISSIONERS, Petitioner,
v.
Elizabeth DOLE, Secretary of the Depart-
ment of Transportation; the Depart­
ment of Transportation; Diane Steed
Administrator of the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration; and t
National Highway Traffic Safety Ad
ministration, Respondents.
The STATE OF NEW YORK, Robert
Abrams, Attorney General of the Stat
of New York, James P. Corcoran, S
perintendent of Insurance of the Stat
of New York and the New York Stat
Department of Insurance, Petitioners
v.
Elizabeth DOLE, Secretary of the
Department of Transportation, et
al., Respondents.
Nos. 84-1301, 84-1459 to 84-1462.
United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.

Argued March 11, 1986.
Decided Sept. 18, 1986.








,

he
-






,

he
­






,

he
­


e
u-
e
e
,

475

476







James F. Fitzpatrick, with whom Michael
N. Sohn, John M. Quinn, Merrick B. Gar-
land and Charles A. Taylor, III, Wash-
ington, D.C., were on the brief, for petition-
ers, State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., et al.
in Nos. 84-1301, 84-1459 and 84-1460.
Melvin Goldberg, with whom Robert
Abrams, Peter Bienstock, Paul M. Glick-
man and Daniel D. Kaplan, New York City,
were on the brief, for petitioners, The State
of N.Y., et al. in No. 84-1462.
Robert H. Myers, Jr., Washington, D.C.,
was on the brief, for petitioner, Nat. Ass’n
of Ins. Com’rsin No. 84-1461.
Douglas Letter, Atty., Dept. of Justice,
with whom Richard K. Willard, Acting
Asst. Atty. Gen., Dept. of Justice, Kenneth
N. Weinstein, Deputy Asst. Gen. Counsel,
Dept. of Transp., Frank Bemdt, Chief
Counsel, Nat. Highway Traffic Safety Ad­
min., Paul Blankenstein, Atty., Dept. of
Justice and Stephen P. Wood, Atty., Nat.
Highway Traffic Safety Admin., Wash­
ington, D.C., were on the brief, for respon­
dents in Nos. 84-1301, 84-1459, 84-1460,
84-1461 and 84-1462.
Christopher D. Coppin, Asst. Atty. Gen.,
State of N.M., Albuquerque, N.M., was on
the brief, for amicus curiae, The State of
N.M. urging reversal in Nos. 84-1301, 84-
1459,84-1460 and 84-1461.
Philip R. Collins, Washington, D.C., was
on the brief, for amicus curiae, Automotive
Occupant Protection Ass’n urging reversal

1. “Passiveprotection" refers to technologies that
require no affirmative conduct by the automo-
bile occupant. Examples are: airbags, which
are deflated bags stored under the dashboard or
in the steering wheel of a car that inflate in
front of thedecelerates;occupantveryrapidlyinteriors
suddenly passive addi-
tional padding and changes to such items as the
steering column designed to make a car’sinteri-
or sufficiently safe even without safety belts or
in Nos. 84-1301, 84-1459, 84-1460 and 84-
1461.
Debbie M. Zuckerman was on the brief,
for amicus curiae, Epilepsy Foundation of
America, urging reversal in Nos. 84-1301,
84-1459, 84-1460 and 84-1461.
Dennis J. Barbour, Roanoke, Va., was on
the brief, for amicus curiae, American Aca-
demy of Pediatrics, et al. urging reversal in
Nos. 84-1301, 84-1459, 84-1460 and 84-
1461.
Jerris Leonard, Washington, D.C., was
on the brief, for amicus curiae, Conference
of Ins. Legislators urging reversal in Nos.
84-1301, 84-1459, 84-1460 and 84-1461.
Before MIKVA, SCALIA and STARR,
Circuit Judges.

Opinion for the Court filed by Circuit
Judge STARR.
Opinion concurring in part and dissenting
in part filed by Circuit Judge MIKVA.

STARR, Circuit Judge:
These consolidated cases bring us once
more into the long-standing controversy
over the Department of Transportation’s
regulations with respect to “passive re-
straints” in automobiles. Unlike its most
recent predecessor, the rule at issue re-
quires the phased-in installation of auto-
matic (i.e., passive) protection devices in
new cars manufactured for sale in the
United States beginning September 1986.1
The rule, however, contains a provision un-
der which the Secretary of Transportation
will rescind the requirement if, by April 1,
1989, States covering two-thirds of the Na-
tion’s population enact mandatory safety
belt usage laws. This provision is chal-

airbags; and automatic safety belts,which move
into place automatically when the passenger sits
in a seat and closes the door. Automatic belts
can be detachable, meaning that they have an
easily reachable release mechanism that can be
,whenacarusedtodisconnectthe belt and leave itthat way
permanently, or nondetachable, meaning that
they can only be disconnected by disabling
them completely, such as by cutting the belt
itself.

lenged by all petitioners2 as both contrary
to the applicable statute and as arbitrary
and capricious. While joining in this com-
mon attack, the State of New York mounts
a separate challenge to the Secretary’s de-
cision not to adopt certain alternative stan-
dards in the final regulation.
We hold that the attack upon the re-
scission feature of the regulation is not
ripe for judicial review. We also hold that
New York’s separate challenge, while ripe,
fails on the merits.

I
In response high on
to death tolls our
Nation’s highways, Congress enacted the
National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1966 (the Safety Act), 15 U.S.C.
§§ 1381et seq. (1982). The Safety Act was
intended “to reduce traffic accidents and
deaths and injuries to persons resulting
from traffic accidents.” Id. § 1381. To
that end, the statute directed the Secretary
to “establish by order appropriate Federal
motor vehicle safety standards” that are
“practicable, [and] meet the need for motor
vehicle safety____” Id. § 1392(a).
Under this broad mandate, the Depart­
ment in 1967 promulgated Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard 208, which re­
quired installation of manual safety belts in
all cars. 32 Fed.Reg. 2408, (1967)
2415
(Standard 208). Two years later, however,
the Department initiated consideration of
automatic or passive occupant protection
technology since the level of safety belt
usage was quite low. As a result of this
inquiry, the Department in 1972adopted an
amendment to Standard 208 requiring
“complete passive protection” on automo­
biles manufactured after August 15, 1975.
37 Fed.Reg. 3911(1972). Standard 208was
subsequently reconsidered and modified a

2. Petitioners in thiscaseCo.;areStateFarm Mutual
Automobile InsuranceInsurers;theNational Associ-
ation of IndependentCo.; Nationwide Mu-
tual Insurance the American Insurance As-
sociation; the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners;Insurance,theStateofNewYork, itsDe-
partment of itsInsurance;AttorneyGene
and itsSuperintendent of and two
individuals, Kent Mason and Patricia Warren.
477

number of times.3 Ultimately, it was
amended to require the phasing-in of pas­
sive restraints beginning with the 1982
automobile model year. 42 Fed.Reg. 34,-­
289 (1977). This Modified Standard 208
was upheld on review by this Court. See
Pacific Legal Foundation v. Department
of Transportation, 593 F.2d 1338 (D.C.
Cir.), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 830, 100 S.Ct.
57, 62 L.Ed.2d 38 (1979).
In February 1981, the Department re­
opened the rulemaking that had produced
Modified Standard 208. 46 Fed.Reg. 12033
(1981). Two months later, itpostponed the
date on which phase-in of passive restraints
was to begin, 46 Fed.Reg. 21, 172(1981),
and proposed the possible rescission of the
entire standard, id. at 21,205. Following a
comment period and public hearings, the
Department concluded that a reliable basis
no longer existed on which to conclude that
the passive restraint requirements would
have significant safety benefits. In view
of the substantial costs of implementing
the requirement and the lack of a viable
alternative, the agency simply rescinded
the standard. 46 Fed.Reg. 53,419 (1981).
This action was overturned by this court in
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insur­
ance Co. v. Department of Transporta­
tion, 680 F.2d 206 (D.C.Cir.1982). The Su­
preme Court vacated our judgment, but
agreed that the agency’s action was arbi­
trary and capricious. The matter was re­
manded to the Secretary for further consid­
eration. See Motor Vehicle Manufactur­
ers Association v. State Farm Mutual
Automobile Insurance Co., 463 U.S. 29,
57, 103 S.Ct. 2856, 2873, 77 L.Ed.2d 443
(1983)(State Farm).
It is the Secretary’s determination upon
reconsideration that is now before us. Af-
ter suspending the effective date of Mod-
ified Standard 208 for one year, 48 Fed.
Reg. 39,908 (1983),the Department issued

3. This history is detailed in State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins.Co. v.Department of Transp., 680F.2d
206, 210-12 (D.C.Cir.1982), vacated sub nom.
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’nv. State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 103 S.Ct. 2856, 77
L.Ed.2d 443 (1983).
ral,

478

a notice of proposed rulemaking and re-
quested comments regarding what action it
should take- with respect to passive re-
straints, 48 Fed.Reg. 48,622 (1983).4 Fol-
lowing the close of the comment period, the
Department issued a supplemental notice
of proposed rulemaking to gather addition-
al comments. 49 Fed.Reg. 20,460 (1984).5
On July 17, 1984, the Department publish-
ed its final rule amending Modified Stan-
dard 208 to require passive restraints. 49
Fed.Reg. 28,962 (1984) (codified at 49
C.F.R. § 571.208 (1984)) (Final Rule). The
Final Rule can be satisfied in several ways,
including airbags, enhanced padding of the
automobile interior, and [] either detacha-
ble or non-detachable automatic belts.
During the first few years after the stan-
dard takes effect, the Final Rule creates
special incentives for installation of passive
protection systems other than automatic
belts. Specifically, for each car in which an
airbag or passive interior system is install-
ed, the manufacturer will be given credit
for an extra one-half automobile toward its
percentage requirement. Id. at 29,000.
The Final Rule requires the phasing-in of
passive occupant protection in all passen-
4. The notice of proposed rulemakingaction,suggested
several possible courses of including re-
taining Modified Standard 208 but setting a new
compliance schedule; amending Modified Stan-
dard 208 to require airbagsonly;only,or airbags or
non-detachable208; belts rescinding Modified
Standard conducting a voluntary demon-
strationgatherprogramdata;byautomobile manufacturers
to safetymore usage and seeking mandatory48,622
state belt laws. 48 Fed.Reg.
5. This notice sought comments regarding public
acceptance of automatic restraints, usage rates
and effectiveness of the various restraint sys-
tems, and the benefits to be derived from the
various alternatives. The Department also
sought comments on the following automobile
occupant protection alternatives: requiring au-
tomatic restraints with a waiver for States with
mandatory safety belt usage laws (MULs); re-
quiring automatic restraintsMULs;except if three-
fourths of the Statesprogramenactby requiring a
facturers;demonstrationandrequiringairbagsautomobileforthem
side of small cars only. 49 Fed.Reg.driver’s20,46
(1984). This comment period closed on June
13, 1984.

6. These conditions are: (1) that the MUL re-
quire each out-board (non-center front seat) oc-
cupant of a passenger car that that was required
ger cars beginning September 1, 1986. Id.
at 28,968. But there is another feature of
the Final Rule which has drawn the peti-
tioners’ attack. The passive restraint re-
quirements embodied in the new standard
will be rescinded if by April 1, 1989, two-
thirds of the population of the United
States is covered by mandatory usage laws
(MULs) which meet certain specified condi-
tions. Id.6 It is this “trap door” provision,
as petitioners colorfully put it, that pro-
vides the focal point of the various chal-
lenges before us. To exacerbate matters,
as petitioners see it, the Final Rule further
provides that the Secretary will consider
waiving the minimum requirements for
States that had “substantially complying”
MULs in place prior to August 1,1984. Id.
at 28,999. The automatic occupant protec-
tion requirement will be rescinded immedi-
ately upon the Secretary’s determination
that the requisite two-thirds population lev-
el is reached.7


II
We first address the ripeness issues
raised by the Secretary. After setting
by federal regulation, when manufactured, to be
equipped with front seat occupant restraints to
have those restraints properly fastened about
their bodies at all times while the vehicle is in
forward motion; (2) a prohibition of waivers
from the MUL except for medical reasons; (3)
an effective date of not later than September 1,
1989; and (4) an enforcement program that
. includes (a) a minimum penalty of $25, with a
separate penalty imposed for each person violat-
ing the law, (b) a civil litigation penalty provid-
ing that the violation of a MUL may be used in
mitigating anyaccident,damages(c)soughtbya person in-
jured in an the establishment of a
program to encourage compliance with the
MUL,and (d) the establishment of a MULevalu-
ation program by the State to provide informa-
tion to the Department regarding its MUL. 49
C.F.R. § 571.208.S4.1.5.2(1984).

7. The compliance schedule in the absence of
anu- rescission is as follows: ten percent of all auto-
0 mobiles manufactured after September 1, 1986;
twenty-five percent after September 1, 1987;
forty percent after September 1, 1988; and one
hundred percent after September 1, 1989. 49
Fed.Reg. at 28,963.

forth some general principles to guide our
analysis, we then examine each issue raised
by petitioners to determine whether it is
ripe for review.

A
The ripeness doctrine limits the
power of federal courts in adjudicating dis­
putes. Its roots are found in both the
Article III requirement of “case or contro­
versy” and prudential considerations favor­
ing the orderly conduct of the administra­
tive and judicial processes. See Regional
Rail Reorganization Act Cases, 419 U.S.
102, 138, 95 S.Ct. 335, 356, 42 L.Ed.2d 320
(1974); Eagle-Picher Industries v. EPA,
759 F.2d 905, 912 (D.C.Cir.1985).8 Accord­
ing to the leading Supreme Court case on
the subject, Abbott Laboratories v. Gard­
ner, 387 U.S. 136,87 S.Ct. 1507, 18L.Ed.2d
681 (1967),the ripeness doctrine is designed
to protect both Article II and Article III
interests. First, itis intended “to prevent
the courts, through avoidance of premature
adjudication, from entangling themselves
in abstract disagreements over administra­
tive policies.” 387 U.S. at 148, 87 S.Ct. at
1515. Second, the doctrine is intended “to
protect the agencies from judicial interfer­
ence until an administrative decision has
been formalized and its effects felt in a
concrete way by the challenging parties.”
Id.
Abbott Laboratories set forth a now fa-
miliar two-part test for deciding whether
an agency action is ripe for review, focus-
ing on both (1) “the fitness of the issues for
judicial decision,” and (2) “the hardship to
the parties of withholding court considera-
tion.” Id. at 149, 87 S.Ct. at 1515. Like
other legal inquiries, application of this test
isby no means an exact science; nor is itto
be a matter of weaving “complicated legal
distinctions” divorced from reality. See
Midwestern Gas Transmission Co. v.
FERC, 589 F.2d 603, 618 (D.C.Cir.1978);
Continental Air Lines, Inc. v. CAB, 522
F.2d 107, 128 (D.C.Cir.1974). It requires,

8. This court has recently stated that "[t]he point
at which constitutional constraint fades into
persuasive practicalities is difficultto discern
and unnecessary to identify.” Action Alliance of
479

rather, the exercise of “practical common
sense,” faithful to the considerable body of
law which guides us. Id. at 124.

Under the first prong of the Abbott
Labs test, the court considers any institu­
tional interests that either the court or the
agency may have for postponing review.
See Eagle-Picher, 759 F.2d at 915. Under
this branch of our analysis, we consider
such matters as whether the agency’s ac­
tion is final and whether the issue is a
purely legal one. See, e.g., Abbott Labora­
tories, 387 U.S. at 149, 87 S.Ct. at 1515;
Continental Air Lines, 522 F.2d at 126.
But even when agency action is final and
the issues presented are purely legal, a
court may nonetheless properly deem a
matter unfit for resolution if postponing
review would provide for a more efficient
examination and disposition of the issues.
See Toilet Goods Association v. Gardner,
387 U.S. 158, 163-64, 87 S.Ct. 1520, 1524-­
25, 18 L.Ed.2d 697 (1967);Alascom, Inc. v.
FCC, 727 F.2d 1212, 1217 (D.C.Cir.1984);
Midwestern Gas, 589 F.2d at 620. The
court, for example, might determine that
“further administrative action is needed to
clarify the agency’s position,” Action Alli­
ance of Senior Citizens v. Heckler, 789
F.2d 931, 940 (D.C.Cir.1986),or that the
court’s deliberations might benefit from
letting the question arise “in some more
concrete and final form,” Eagle-Picher, 759
F.2d at 915 (quoting Continental Air
Lines, 522 F.2d at 125); or that resolution
of the dispute is likely to prove unneces­
sary, see id. For all these reasons, courts
and agencies have a legitimate interest in
avoiding adjudication of speculative contro­
versies.

The second prong of the Abbott
Labs test requires consideration of the
countervailing interests of the challenging
parties in obtaining a prompt resolution of
their dispute. See id. at 915. It is well
settled that for an institutional interest in

Senior Citizens v. Heckler, 789 F.2d 931, 940
(D.C.Cir.1986). The same result obtains wheth-
er the court bases its finding of unripeness on
constitutional or prudential considerations.

480

deferral to be outweighed, postponing re-
view must impose a hardship on the com-
plaining party that is immediate, direct,
and significant. See Abbott Laboratories,
387 U.S. at 152-53, 87 S.Ct. at 1517-18;
Action Alliance, at 940. Thus, as in Ab-
bott Labs itself, an agency enforcement
policy may impose the requisite hardship
even before the policy is implemented if,
for example, it would reasonably prompt a
regulated industry, unwilling to risk sub-
stantial penalties by defying the policy, to
undertake costly compliance measures.
See, e.g., Abbott Laboratories, 387 U.S. at
152-53, 87 S.Ct. at 1517-18. On the other
hand, a party’s allegation of hardship will
be found wanting if there are too many
“ifs” in the asserted causal chain linking
the agency’saction to the alleged hardship,
see, e.g., Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v.
FERC, 736 F.2d 747, 750 (D.C.Cir.1984),or
if the asserted hardship is not sufficiently
concrete, see, e.g., Abbott Laboratories,
387 U.S. at 148, 87 S.Ct. at 1515. “The
mere potential for future injury,” more-
over, is not enough. Alascom, 727 F.2d at
1217 (emphasis in original).
We recognize that even though “the
courts might prefer to resolve a particular
question at another time and place, they
should have a very good reason for indulg­
ing that preference, if in doing so they are
refusing a petitioner’s request to be re­
lieved of an onerous legal uncertainty.”
Continental Air Lines, 522 F.2d at 128.
But, if the interests of the court and agen­
cy in postponing review outweigh the inter­
ests of those seeking relief, settled princi­
ples of ripeness squarely call for adjudica­
tion to be postponed.

9. Petitioners(1)advance three grounds for this as-
sertion: the Secretary failed adequately to
consider the alternativepassiveofpermittingstandard,
MULsand a federal restraint
see State Farm Brief25-27;at33-36;NAICBrief at 11;
New York Brief at (2) the Secretary has
provided insufficient justification for her view
that MULs in States covering two-thirds of the
U.S. population would provide safety benefits
equal toor greater than a passive restraint stan-
dard, see State Farm Brief at 36-45; NAICBrief
at 11; NewYork Brief at 24-25; and (3)that the
provision’swaiver rule lacks a rational basis, see
New York Brief at 27-29.
B
With one exception, we conclude that in
the case before us the uncertainties occa-
sioned by postponing review are not suffi-
ciently onerous— if indeed they are onerous
at all— to overcome the institutional inter-
ests in postponement. The exception, as
we will explain later, is New York’s chal-
lenge to the Secretary’s decision rejecting
certain alternatives in her formulation of
the passive restraint standard.


1
All of the petitioners that,
contend
for various reasons, the automatic re­
scission feature of the Secretary’s rule is
arbitrary and capricious.9 This issue, we
are persuaded, is not ripe for review under
the Abbott Labs analysis.
To be sure, the Secretary’s Final Rule
constitutes final agency action. And, the
question whether the rescission provision is
arbitrary and capricious requires no fur-
ther factual development inasmuch as this
question must be resolved on the basis of
the administrative record before the Secre-
tary at the time of her decision.10
Nonetheless, the institutional interest in
avoiding speculative controversies is pow-
erfully present here because the evidence
before us indicates that the possible
re-
scission about which petitioners are vexed
will likely never occur. According to data
supplied by one petitioner, State Farm In-
surance Co., twenty States, covering sixty
percent of the U.S. population, have now
passed mandatory usage laws. None of

10. One of the petitioners also contends that this
case is fit for review because "Congress has
bothexplicitly indicated that final automotive safety
standards ... be reviewed within 60 days of
their promulgation. 15 U.S.C. § 1394(a)(1)."
NAIC Brief at 3. The petitioner, however, has
misconstrued the statute. That measure does
not speak to courts at all; instead it requires
anyone who seeks to challenge the Secretary’s
standard to filea petition for review within 60
days of promulgation.

these laws, however, apparently complies
with the Secretary’s specific requirements.
See State Farm Supplemental Brief at 7-
10. la.11 Even if all remaining States were
to pass complying MULs (and assuming
that New York’s pre-Final Rule MUL is
counted under the Secretary’s waiver provi-
sion), some States with MULs now on the
books would have to amend their statutes
to comply with the Final Rule in order for
the two-thirds population requirement to be
met.12 On the record before us, it appears
singularly unlikely that the passive re-
straint standard will be rescinded by
1989.13 Failure to rescind the standard at
that time would, of course, render the as-
sault on the provision moot. Since it ap-
pears unlikely that the “trap door” will
ever be opened, a decision on this issue
may very well prove unnecessary.

The institutional interest in postponing
review has not been counterbalanced by
the requisite showing of hardship. Peti-
tioners allege hardship resulting from (1)
deaths that will likely occur if the Secre-
tary’s rule is rescinded; (2) the effects of
the rescission provision on the technologi-
cal development of passive restraint sys-
tems; and (3) the effect of the provision on
the States and, in turn, on the insurance
companies’ and insurance commissioners’
lobbying efforts. We examine each of
these in turn.

11. Indeed, petitioners assert that since the Sec-
retary promulgated the Final Rule, the trend in
state legislatures is to pass MULs that deliber-
ately fall short of the Secretary’s requirements
so that the population Secretary’softhoseStateswillnot
counted toward the numerical re-
quirement. See State Farm Supplemental Brief
at 9.
12. Aside from New York, States covering ap-
proximately 52 percent of the U.S. population
have passed apparently noncomplying MULs
since the Final Rule was promulgated. New
York, which accounts for approximately 8 per-
cent of the population, passed a MUL prior to
August 1, 1984. New York’s MUL appears to
"substantially comply" with the Secretary’s re-
quirements, thus it is quite possible that New
York’spopulation will be counted towards the
two-thirds population requirement under the
waiver provision in the Final Rule. Assuming
New York's MUL is counted, States covering at
least an additional 59 percent of the U.S. popu-
481

The first concern is clearly misplaced and
need not detain us. The evil feared by
petitioners will never eventuate if re-
scission is never effected. If, on the other
hand, the “trap door” appeared imminently
ready to open, then petitioners could avail
themselves of further judicial proceed-
ings— including seeking a stay— to prevent
that event from taking place. See Tennes-
see Gas, 736 F.2d at 751; Air New Zealand
v. CAB, 726 F.2d 832, 837 (D.C.Cir.1984).
There will be ample opportunity to chal-
lenge rescission if it appears imminent at
any time during the Secretary’s three-year
window of opportunity (or, as petitioners
see it,a window of vulnerability).
Petitioners’ second concern is that the
rescission provision may be having an im-
mediate, adverse effect on automakers’ in-
centives to develop passive restraint sys-
tems. They fear that automakers will de-
lay development of such systems, with the
result that the passive restraints which are
eventually installed will be inferior and un-
dertested. This, presumably, would affect
the insurance companies’ultimate liabilities
and, hence, their rates.
But this argument does not withstand
analysis. First, it fails to take adequately
into account the practical reality that the
automobile industry must begin manufac-
turing cars with passive restraints in Sep-
tember of this year.14 See supra note 7.
Second, and more fundamentally, the chal-

lation will stillhave to pass complying MULs
between now and 1989.

13. Petitioners also seem concerned that the Sec-
be retary might bend the requirements of the Final
Rule and count noncomplying MULs, passed
after promulgation of the rule and therefore not
subject to the waiver provision, toward the two-
thirds population requirement as long as they
are in substantial compliance with the Secre-
tary’s MUL standards. would,Shouldthe Secretary
take such action, she of course, be
changing the rules in the middle of the game.
She has not yet indicated any intention of doing
so. Ifshebywere to alterhowever,therulesinthemanner
feared petitioners,would,course,review on that
ground as well of be available at
that time.
Moreover,
14. it is questionable whether the
short-run incentives for development of non-
belt passive restraints created by the Secretary’s

482

lenge is rife with speculation about what
may occur in the automobile industry.
Lacking any evidence to support their view,
petitioners would have us gaze into a crys-
tal ball to determine what Detroit may or
may not do. On such musings judicial re-
view cannot properly be grounded.15
The third and, according to petitioners,
most serious hardship spawned by postpon-
ing review is to “weaken state efforts to
enact tough MULs.” State Farm Reply
Brief at 9; NAIC Reply Brief at 5-6. Peti-
tioners reason that state legislatures are
forced by the Final Rule to choose between
a federal passive restraint standard and
strong MULs.
The threshold and, in our view, fatal
difficulty with this argument is that the

rule (giving extra credit for non-belt restraint
systems installed during the phase-in period),
see 49 Fed.Reg. at 29,000, will be seriously dilut-
ed by the risk that the standard will be rescind-
ed sometime beforenoted,theend of the phase-in
period. As already it now seems most
unlikely that the Secretary will haveall;occasion to
invoke the rescission provision at in addi-
tion, the federal requirement of passive re-
straints goes into effect for ten percent of the
fleet coming off the assembly line in the next
few months. Rescission is plainly not immi-
nent; what is imminent is the installation, pur-
suant to federal mandate, of passive restraints.

15. Petitioners’ position seems in this respect
similar to the alleged hardship which we reject-
ed as a basis for ripeness in Midwestern Gas.
There, importers of Canadian natural gas chal-
lenged an agency’sconditional authorization al-
lowing other importers to import Canadian gas
through part ofthat,theAlaska pipeline. The im-
porters alleged if Canadian reserves dwin-
dled, Canada might perceive the U.S. agency’s
action as a signal that this Nation "favored" the
Alaska pipeline; in consequence, the theory
went, the Canadian energy authorities might
choose to grant import authorizations to "fa-
vored” importers whose purchases came
through that pipeline. This claim was deemed
insufficient to merit adjudication at that time
largely because the asserted injury was ground-
ed on speculation about future events and fu-
ture behavior of third parties. See 589 F.2d at
622-23. So too here.
that, formulating
16.mandatoryPetitionersallegelegislation,in its
Jersey consciouslyseatbelt the State of New
decided to employ a $20 fíne
for non-compliance, rather than a higher fine,
in order to avoid having its law count toward
petitioners seek to assert the hardships of
States that are not before the court. Ab-
bott Laboratories requires that we look at
the “hardship to the parties.” 387 U.S. at
149, 87 S.Ct. at 1515. New York is the
only State to have petitioned for review of
the Secretary’s Final Rule, and New York
had already passed an MUL before the
Final Rule was promulgated. By virtue of
its pre-MUL being firmly in place, New
York is left to contend only that “if New
York soon determines that its MUL needs
to be strengthened, the State will face a
serious dilemma.” New York Reply Brief
at 6 (emphasis added).16 This is, again, a
speculative scenario, not an indication of
immediate or concrete hardship of the kind
demanded under the cases.17

the Secretary’s requirement. New Jersey, how-
ever, is not a party to this litigation.

17. But even were we to overlook this threshold
hurdle and allow the insurance companies and
commissioners to assert the interests of the
States, we would still discern no hardship of
sufficient concreteness. The dilemma of the
non-present States as perceived by petitioners
seems to us illusory. States can seemingly
avoid having their MULs "count” toward re-
scission of the federal standard by the expedient
of including in their MULs a provision that
automatically nullifies the measure as soon as it
is counted toward the Secretary’s two-thirds re-
quirement. Indeed, a number of States have
incorporated precisely such provisions in their
MULs. SeeState Farm Reply Brief at 7-10 app.
We of course assume the obvious, namely that
States wouldrisk,prefer not to insert a provision
that poses a however remote, that a much
desired state law might be rescinded. But the
perceived necessity of including such a provi-
sion does not seem to us a sufficiently immedi-
ate or onerous hardship, especially whenAnd,itnow
appears that a rescissionappearimminent,isunlikely. if
rescission does open the court-
house doors are for a renewed challenge
to the "trap door” provision.
Even putting to one side the availability of an
automatic "sunset” provision, the States’assert-
ed dilemma would still be quite unlike that
faced by the pharmaceutical companies in Ab-
bott Laboratories. There, as we previously al-
luded to, the pharmaceutical companies were,
for all practical purposes, coerced into a partic-
ular course of conduct— changing their labels
arid advertisements — by the prospect of civil
and criminal penalties that might be visited
upon them. See 387 U.S. at 152-53, 87 S.Ct. at
1517-18. Primary conduct was clearly being

Petitioners also assert that the rescission
provision produces hardship for States not
contemplating MULs. According to peti-
tioners, such States— already in want of a
MUL— could suffer the further deprivation
of a protective federal passive restraint
standard if as few as sixteen other States
pass qualifying MULs. See NAIC Reply
Brief at 5-6. The State of New Mexico,
one of the amici here, also raises this argu-
ment. See Amicus Curiae Brief of New
Mexico at 3. As we have already estab-
lished, however, this asserted hardship is
not cognizable because it is not being as-
serted by any of the parties before the
court. Assuming arguendo that this argu-
ment could properly be advanced by peti-
tioners (or an amicus), this alleged hardship
is still illusory. The state of affairs peti-
tioners fear will come about, again, only if
the Secretary in fact rescinds the passive
restraint standard. As we have by now
recounted a bit tediously, judicial review
will be available should that time in fact
appear to be at hand. It is not at hand,
and perhaps will never arrive. Postponing
review until that contingency materializes
will impose no hardship on those States.
The direct hardship asserted by the in-
surance companies and commissioners is
likewise inadequate. The principal effect

affected. Here, by contrast, the States fear that
unless they take a particular course of action—
passing MULs that are less stringent than they
would otherwise prefer— the agency will with-
draw federal regulation which the States believe
to be of benefit. That is not the concrete effect
on primary conduct that ripeness doctrine de-
mands. The remote possibility that such a bene-
fitwill be withdrawn is,in our view, a consider-
ably less substantial sort of "hardship" than the
possibility that civiland criminal penalties will
be imposed.
The hardship to the States asserted by peti-
tioners also seems much less onerous than that
asserted in Pacific Gas and Elec. Co. v. State
EnergyComm’n,Resources 190,Conservation and1713,Dev.
461 (1983),U.S. 103 S.Ct. by 75
L.Ed.2d 752 relied upon NAIC.
There, electric utilities contemplating construc-
tion of nuclear plants challenged as preempted
by federal law a California statute imposing a
moratorium on nuclear plant construction until
the State determined that adequate facilities had
been developed nationally for the permanent
disposal of nuclear wastes. The utilities assert-
483

of the rescission provision on them, as they
see it, is to hamper them in their lobbying
efforts to secure enactment of stringent
MULs in the several States by virtue of the
risk that success on that front would insid-
iously undermine the federal passive re-
straint standard. See, e.g., NAIC Reply
Brief at 6. These petitioners, in a word,
want both federal passive restraint require-
ments and tough MULs. They emphatical-
ly do not want to trade off one for the
other. But uncertainty in lobbying strate-
gy scarcely rises to the level of concrete
hardship. It seems similar, upon analysis,
to the “planning uncertainty” which our
prior cases have rejected as insufficient.
See, e.g., Tennessee Gas, 736 F.2d at 749-

50 (rejecting as insufficient the assertion
that the agency’s interpretation affected
current business planning); Diamond
Shamrock Corp. v. Costle, 580 F.2d 670,
673 (D.C.Cir.1978)(rejecting as insufficient
the contention by dischargers that EPA’s
new effluent permit regulations placed
them in “acute dilemma” that affected
their business planning, even before seek-
ing permits under the new regulations).
And, in view of the unlikelihood that re-
scission will ever occur, petitioners’ uncer-
tainty seems minimal at best.18

ed that, in light of the long lead time required
before constructing a nuclear facility,they need-
ed a judicial decision immediately; otherwise,
they would be forced either to abandon all nu-
clear energy development or run the risk that
planning and development expenses would be
incurred for naught. See id. at 201-02,103 S.Ct.
at 1720-21. In either case, the utilities would
suffer serious losses. In view of those circum-
stances, the Court concluded, “[t]o require the
industry to proceed without knowing whether
the moratorium is valid would impose a palpa-
ble and considerable hardship on the utilities,
and may ultimately work harm on the citizens
of California.” Id Here, by contrast, none of
the petitioners alleges that the rescission provi-
sion of the Final Rule has any immediate finan-
cial effects on them.
addition,
18. In the availability of an alternative
state statute that would be rescinded if "count-
ed" for federal recission purposes detracts sig-
nificantly from the force(andofany effects on the
insurance industry’s insurance regulators’)
lobbying activities in the various state capitals.

484

2
The second broad issue raised by
petitioners is whether the Secretary’s auto­
matic rescission is contrary to the Safety
Act. Specifically, petitioners contend that
(1) by abandoning the passive restraint
standard in favor of MULs passed by
some— but not all— of the States, the Secre­
tary violates her statutory duty to ensure
that safety standards be uniform; (2) by
abandoning the standard in favor of State
MULs, the Secretary violates her statutory
duty to put in placefederal standards; and
(3)the automatic rescission provision is un­
lawful because the statute does not confer
upon the Secretary authority to seek to
influence safety legislation in the States.
We find these contentions, upon analysis,
similarly unripe.
The first two contentions depend, of
course, upon rescission of the Final Rule;
unless rescission comes, the evils identified
by petitioners in these two respects will
never come to pass. The harm allegedly
flowing from the replacement of a uniform
federal standard by a patchwork of state
legislation will occur only when (ifever) the
uniform federal standard is rescinded. No
one contends, nor could they reasonably,
that the substantive (i.e., nonrescission)
provisions of the Final Rule are in any wise
non-uniform. Since the Secretary’s sub-
stantive standards are at present national
in scope and uniform in nature (and since,
as already discussed, the rescission provi-
sion will likely never take effect), a sub-
stantial likelihood exists that resolution of
these two issues will prove unnecessary.
For the same reasons that petitioners’ “ar-
bitrary and capricious” attack on the re-
scission provision isunripe, these two argu-
ments must likewise be deemed unripe.
The third statutory challenge, ad­
vanced only by New York, is also unripe,
but requires a somewhat different analysis.
New York claims, in essence, that the Sec­
retary is attempting through the rescission
provision to exert a here-and-now influence

19.derlyingInsoholding,questionwedonotpassuponthe un-
whether an alleged effect
upon an ongoing legislative process is sufficient-
on state legislation. This, New York con-
tends, the Secretary has no statutory pow-
er to do. New York further maintains that
the court has no interest in waiting to see
whether the Secretary’s contemplated ac-
tion ever takes place, for the relevant ac-
tion has already occurred and indeed con-
tinues to occur. This issue is therefore,
New York argues, more “fit” for resolution
than the issues which we have already dis-
cussed.
We are unpersuaded that this issue is
ripe. Although we agree that the Secre-
tary’s alleged violation (as New York sees
it) of the Safety Act has already occurred,
this issue is stillunfit for review because it
has not yet arisen in a sufficiently concrete
setting. As we have seen, New York, the
only party raising this issue, has not al-
leged the existence of any proposed or
pending legislation in that State on which
the Secretary’s asserted violation is having
any purported effect. As to New York
itself, then, the Secretary’s alleged “coer-
cion” of the States is obviously speculation
upon speculation. Moreover, neither New
Mexico(which, as we noted before, filed an
amicus brief) nor any other State is before
us contending that its legislative process is
presently being affected by the Secretary’s
alleged coercion. Although the issue New
York raises appears to be a legal one, it
would be helpful to the court to see how
this alleged coercion actually operates in
practice. See, e.g., Toilet Goods Associa-
tion, 387 U.S. at 164, 87 S.Ct. at 1524
(although issues raised are legal, judicial
appraisal of FDA regulations would “stand
on a much surer footing in the context of a
specific application”). In addition, postpon-
ing review until such a situation allegedly
arises would help “assure that concrete
adverseness which sharpens the presenta-
tion of issues.” Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S.
186, 204, 82 S.Ct. 691, 703, 7 L.Ed.2d 663
(1962)(discussing rationale for standing re-
quirement in setting of constitutional adju-
dication).19 Turning to the second prong of

ly concrete in nature to satisfy the considera-
tions that ripeness doctrine sets before us. The
judicial manageability of such an inquiry isnot

the Abbott Labs test, neither New York
nor any other State alleges, as we have
seen, any direct, present hardship arising
from the Secretary’s alleged violation of
the Safety Act in this respect. Under
these circumstances, the alleged hardship
created by postponing review of this issue
is insufficient to outweigh the institutional
interest in postponement.
In sum, we find that all the issues raised
by petitioners’ attacks on the Secretary’s
rescission provision are not yet ripe for
review. That provision has not been imple-
mented. It may well never be implement-
ed. The hardships alleged by petitioners
are either not their own or rest upon multi-
ple layers of speculation. Were we to en-
tertain these contentions, “we would ven-
ture away from the domain of judicial re-
view into a realm more accurately de-
scribed as judicial preview.” Tennessee
Gas, 736 F.2d at 751. We have not been
commissioned with a “roving preview func-
tion,” see id., and we decline the invitation
to assume that role ourselves.20

3
Of the parties before us, only the
State of New York challenges the Secre­
tary’s decision not to require either airbags
or non-detachable automatic belts as the
sole mechanisms for satisfying the passive
restraint requirement. New York contends
that this decision is “arbitrary and capri­
cious” under the Administrative Procedure
Act, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A)(1982). The issue
immediately evident to us, but we need not and
do not opine one way or the other on the
subject.
20. Our decision does not create a "catch 22" for
litigants seeking review of agency action under
a statutory provision that requires them to peti-
period
tion the court within a short after the
agency’saction becomes final. As we have pre-
viously stated, "it is the duty of the court to
make the prudential judgment whether a chal-
lenge to agency action isripe; itis the responsi-
bility of petitioners to file for review within the
period set by Congress.” Eagle-Picher, 759 F.2d
at 912.
21. The dissent argues that a portion of the New
York challenge found unripe by the court isin
ripe, namely Secretary arbitrarily
fact that "the
485

is ripe for review, for reasons we shall now
describe.
First, the issue fully satisfies the fitness
prong of the Abbott Labs inquiry since
neither the court nor the agency has any-
thing to gain by postponing review. The
agency’s decision is final. Resolution of
the issue requires no more factual develop-
ment than that already contained in the
administrative record. No further adminis-
trative action is needed to clarify the agen-
cy’s position. Indeed, it appears that the
Department intends to take no further ac-
tion on this issue; in consequence, no fu-
ture agency action or proceeding looms on
the horizon that wouldpermit us to test the
effect of the agency’s decision in a more
concrete setting.
Moving to Abbott Labs’ second prong,
New York has alleged substantial hard-
ships resulting from postponing review.
The phasing in of passive occupant protec-
tion mandated by the Secretary’s rule is to
begin straight away, effective September 1,
1986. If New York is correct in asserting
that the Final Rule is more lenient (and
therefore less promotive of automobile
safety) than is justified by the record, then
many people, including New York citizens,
may be adversely affected in the most di-
rect way by the Secretary’s failure to re-
quire greater protection. In the absence of
countervailing institutional interests, we
are satisfied that New York has alleged in
this respect a sufficient hardship so as to
make its contention ripe for review.21
failed to consider the alternative of permitting
both mandatory usage laws (MULs)and a feder-
al passive restraint standard.” Dissent at 490.
But this contention is,upon analysis, simply one
part of the broader attack on the "trapdoor”
provision itselfSecretary’sasbeingarbitrary“permitting"andcapri-
cious. The state-
adopted MULs (plus requiring passive re-
straints) is just another way of describing the
elimination of the Secretary’s "trapdoor.” A
careful scrutiny of the various petitioners’
claims in this respect confirms our reading.
See, e.g., State Farm Brief at 29-36. This
should Secretary’scomeasno"permitting”surprise,sincethemandatorysituation
of the both
usage laws and imposing a federal passive re-
straint standard is in fact(andthesituationpassivethatnow
obtains. State MULs the restraint
requirement) will be "permitted" until such

486

III
We turn then to the merits of the one
ripe issue— New York’s challenge to the
Secretary’s failure to implement certain al­
ternatives suggested during the course of
the rulemaking. In order to prevail, New
York bears the burden of establishing that
the agency’saction was “arbitrary or capri­
cious.” See, e.g., National Association of
Regulatory Utility Commissioners v.
FCC, 746 F.2d 1492, 1502 (D.C.Cir.1984).22
It hardly bears repeating that this is a
narrow standard of review, one which for­
bids us from substituting our judgment for
that of the agency. Citizens to Preserve
Overton Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402,
416, 91 S.Ct. 814, 823, 28 L.Ed.2d 136
(1971). We must, of course, engage in a
“searching and careful” review of the
agency’s reasoning, see id., and avoid be­
coming a “rubberstamp” for the agency,
see Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Fire­
arms v. FLRA, 464 U.S. 89, 97, 104 S.Ct.
439, 444, 78 L.Ed.2d 195 (1983) (quoting
NLRB v. Brown, 380 U.S. 278, 291-92, 85
S.Ct. 980, 988-89, 13 L.Ed.2d 839 (1965)),or
letting deference to the agency’s judg­
ments slip into “judicial inertia,” see id.
(quoting American Shipbuilding Co. v.
NLRB, 380 U.S. 300, 318, 85 S.Ct. 955, 967,
13 L.Ed.2d 855 (1965)). But we may none­
theless overturn agency action only where
a “clear error of judgment” has occurred.
Bowman Transportation, Inc. v. Arkan­
sas-Best Freight System, Inc., 419 U.S.
281, 285, 95 S.Ct. 438, 441, 42 L.Ed.2d 447
(1974); Overton Park, 401 U.S. at 416, 91

time, ifever, that the requisite population cover-
age is met, a condition which we have already
determined to be unlikely to occur. It is the
contingent (and indeed remote) nature of this
desired state of affairs coming to an end that
renders this contention unripe for review.

22. The standard of review in this case isdeter-
mined by the Safety Act. Section 103(b) of the
Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1392(b) (1982), provides that
"all orders establishing, amending, or revoking
a Federal motor vehicle safety standard” shall
be promulgated under the informal rulemakingAct,
procedures ofthe AdministrativeAPA,Procedureturn,
5 U.S.C.that,§553(1982). The in pro-
videsconcerned,insofarasthepresent bases of attack
are the agency’saction may be set
aside by a reviewing court only iffound to be
S.Ct. at 823. The agency must be upheld
as long as it has articulated a satisfactory“
explanation for its action, including a ‘ra-
tional connection between” the facts found
and the choice made.’ State Farm, 463
U.S. at 43,103 S.Ct. at 2866 (1983)(quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United
States, 371 U.S. 156, 168,83 S.Ct. 239, 246,
9 L.Ed.2d 207 (1962)).
As is by now common ground in such
cases, the agency may be overturned if, for
example, it “has relied on factors which
Congress has not intended it to consider,
entirely failed to consider an important as-
pect of the problem, offered an explanation
for its decision that runs counter to the
evidence before the agency, or is so implau-
sible that it could not be ascribed to a
difference in view or the product of agency
expertise.” Id. Although we may not
make up for deficiencies in the agency’s
analysis, see SEC v. Chenery Corp., 332
U.S. 194, 196, 67 S.Ct. 1575, 1577,91 L.Ed.
1995 (1947),we will “uphold a decision of
less than ideal clarity if the agency’s path
may reasonably be discemed[,]” Bowman
Transportation, 419 U.S. at 286, 95 S.Ct.
at 442.

New York contends that the passive re-
straint standard contained in the Final Rule
fails the “arbitrary and capricious” test in
three respects. First, New York asserts
that the Department should have excluded
the option of meeting the passive restraint
requirement with detachable automatic
belts, see New York Brief at 29-32;23 sec-

"arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or
otherwise not in accordance with law." Id.
§ 706(2)(A).

23. New York also contends that the Secretary’s
failure to eliminate detachable seatbelts as an
acceptable automatic restraint violates the Safe-
ty Act. The argument appears to be as follows:
The Act directs the Secretary to establish motor
vehicle standards that "shall meet the need for
motor vehicle safety.” 15 U.S.C. §§ 1391(2),
1392(a). “Motor vehicle safety,” moreover, is
defined as protection against "unreasonable
risk.” Id. § 1391(1). Because the usage rate
with non-detachable beltsbelts,ishigherthanthatfor
detachable automatic DOT is required to
eliminate the detachable belt option; to do oth-
erwise would permit "unreasonable" risk. See

ond, it maintains that the Secretary should
have required airbags in all cars, see id. at
33-36; and finally, it contends that the
Secretary failed altogether to consider the
option of requiring both airbags and non-
detachable belts, see id. at 32.

1

The Secretary fully considered the
suggestion that, as among automatic belts,
only non-detachable rather than detachable
belts be deemed to meet the federal stan­
dard. Her refusal to embrace the idea was
based primarily upon two factors. First,
since a non-detachable belt is, according to
the Secretary, “the most coercive type of
automatic restraint,” 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,-­
993, imposing that particular requirement
would create a “serious adverse public re­
action,” id. at 29,002. New York contends
that this conclusion “is admitted to be pure
speculation and belied by surveys of con­
sumer attitudes in the record.” New York
Brief at 30. New York fails, however, to
support this contention with any citations
to the record or to otherwise buttress its
position. See id. The Secretary, by con­
trast, cites surveys finding that 10 to 20
percent of the public would be likely to cut
non-detachable belts, thereby defeating the
system. See 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,993. This
sort of consideration is entirely appropriate
to weigh in the balance; as we have previ­
ously held in the very context of passive
restraint standards, the Department “can­
not fulfill its statutory responsibility unless
it considers popular reaction.” Pacific Le­
gal Foundation, 593 F.2d at 1345.

New York Brief at 22-23. Even assuming the
accuracy of New York’sassertion about the ef-
fectiveness of non-detachable belts, we cannot
agree with this argument. The Safety Act does
not require the Secretaryprovidingtoadoptgreatestthet
logicalsafety.alternativeexpresslythepermits
of The Act the Secre-
tary to consider such factors as reasonableness
and practicality in addition to safety features.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1392(f)(3). Both the Supreme
Court and thiscourt, moreover, have recognized
the Secretary’s authority to consider such
Farm,factorsascostand54,publicacceptance.2872;SeeState
Legal Foundation,463U.S.at593103F.2dS.Ct.at1345.atPaci
487

The second basis of the Secretary’s re-
fusal to eliminate detachable automatic
belts from the passive restraint require-
ment was her judgment that non-detacha-
ble belts would effectively force manufac-
turers to eliminate the center front seat.
See 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,993. According to
the Secretary, even if the center seat were
exempt from the automatic belt require-
ment, occupants of that seat would have
difficulty getting past non-detachable belts
to situate themselves at their front seat
destination. See id. Although New York
argues that this conclusion is not necessar-
ily correct (since the Secretary could either
require motorized automatic belts which
come into place only when the doors are
closed or, alternatively, could make an ex-
ception for cars with center seats), we can-
not say that the Secretary’s conclusion in
this respect constitutes a “clear error of
judgment,” see Bowman Transportation,
419 U.S. at 285, 95 S.Ct. at 442, or is
otherwise arbitrary and capricious.24
2
New York next attacks the Secre­
tary’s airbags
failure to mandate in all
cars. Consistent with the Supreme Court’s
admonition that she is obliged to consider
this option, see State Farm, 463 U.S. at 46,
103 S.Ct. at 2868, the Secretary analyzed
this possibility in considerable detail. See
49 Fed.Reg. at 28,990-92, 29,000-02.
Her ultimate decision not to require air-
bags, but to provide incentives for their
employment, was based on two factors.25
First, despite their admitted safety bene-
fits, airbags are costly; According to De-

24. We also note that an earlier passive restraint
standard permitting compliance by means of a
detachable belt was upheld by this court in
Pacific Legal Foundation.
echno-degree
25. The dissent suggests that the States do not
need to be encouraged to pass MULs. Dissent
at 495. That view, however, is not buttressed
by any facts. Indeed, itwould appear that the
passage of MULs has in fact come about in
response to the Secretary’srule. Supp. Brief for
Respondent at 5.

fic

488

partment estimates, they would cost $320
more per car than manual belts; in addi-
tion, their replacement cost is an estimated
$800, making it likely that many airbags
would not be replaced once used. See 49
Fed.Reg. at 29,001.26 These cost factors
were appropriately taken into account.
The Supreme Court observed in State
Farm that “[t]he agency is correct to look
at the costs as well as the benefits of
Standard 208.” 463 U.S. at 54, 103 S.Ct. at
2872. Cf, e.g., American Textile Manu-
facturers Institute, Inc. v. Donovan, 452
U.S. 490, 509, 101 S.Ct. 2478, 2490, 69
L.Ed.2d 185 (1981) (overturning OSHA’s
cotton dust regulations, in part because
OSHA had employed cost-benefit analysis
in the face of statutory language mandat-
ing feasibility analysis). In light of these
cost estimates, the Secretary concluded
that the safety benefits of airbags would
not be worth their high cost.27
New York vehemently challenges the
agency’s cost-benefit analysis in this arena
of human safety. Specifically, New York
complains that the standard takes into ac-
count neither the factor of pain and suffer-
ing nor the value of human life itself. See
New York Brief at 33. Not so. The Final
Rule devoted several pages to a discussion
of the relative effectiveness of airbags,
seatbelts, and passive restraints in reduc-
ing fatalities and serious injuries. See 49
Fed.Reg. at 28,984-87; 29,001.
In a related vein, New York takes the
Secretary to task for relying upon the De-
partment’s own cost estimates rather than
lower estimates found in the record.

26. The"inadvertentlydissentarguesdeployed,"thatsinceai
rarely consumers will
gladly pay to “replace the devices that saved the
car’s occupants from death or serious injury.”
Dissent at496. The dissent’sanalysis leaves no
room for the category of airbags that are
deployed by virtue of sudden deceleration,
without a crash, or those deployed in a minor
accident for which seat belts would have suf-
ficed. While those saved from serious injury by
virtue of deployedcost,bagsmay be willing to incur
the replacement drivers not fitting into
that category may resist paying $800 to replace
inadvertently deployed bags.
More broadly, itshould not go unnoticed that
the dissent goes farther in its attack on the
Again, we cannot say that the Secretary’s
cost estimates are arbitrary, particularly in
light of other cost estimates submitted by
the automobile manufacturers that run
much higher than the Secretary’s. In our
view, such details of cost-benefit analysis
are “most appropriately entrusted to the
expertise of an agency,” especially where,
as here, the evidence runs in contrary di-
rections. See Office of Communication of
United Church of Christ v. FCC, 707 F.2d
1413, 1440 (D.C.Cir.1983).
The second basis for the Secretary’s deci-
sion was public acceptability. As a thresh-
old matter, the Secretary recognized that
public acceptability would depend to a
great extent on the cost of airbags to con-
sumers, concluding that “only a small per-
centage appears willing to pay more than
$400” for the devices. 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,-
988. She also took cognizance of public
fears about chemicals used to deploy air-
bags, the possibility of inadvertent deploy-
ment of the devices, and the sense of inse-
curity harbored by some people at not hav-
ing a belt wrapped around them. The Sec-
retary reasoned that even though these
fears are largely unfounded they must
nonetheless be taken seriously. She opined
that “[i]t may be easier to overcome these
concerns ifairbags are not the only way of
complying with an automatic occupant pro-
tection requirement.” 49 Fed.Reg. at 29,-
001. In short, the Secretary determined
that these concerns could best be ad-
dressed through real-world experience in
the marketplace rather than by regulatory
fiat. New York’s only response to this

rbagsareSecretary’srulethandissent,theinsuranceindustry it-
self. Unlike the State Farm does not
contend that the Secretary’s substantive rule on
passive restraints isunduly lenient.

27. The dissent argues that the Secretary improp-
erly focused on costs, not safety. Dissent at
496. However, as the dissent concedes, the
Secretary concluded that the replacement cost
of airbags would likely deter consumers from
replacing them. Ifthe airbags are not replaced,
the Secretary feared, then the occupants of
those cars would be leftunprotected. Dissent at
495. In our view, the crux of the Secretary’s
concern in this respect was safety, not cost per
se.

point is a single survey indicating that air-
bags enjoy a higher level of public accepta-
bility than either automatic or manual
belts. Particularly in light of a contrary
public opinion survey and numerous public
comments going in a contrary direction, see
49 Fed.Reg. at 28,988,we cannot say that
the Secretary’s refusal to give determina-
tive weight to the survey championed by
New York descended to the depths of arbi-
trary and capricious action.
3
New York’s final attack on the Final
Rule isthat the Secretary failed to consider
the alternative of requiring both airbags
and non-detachable automatic belts. An
agency, of course, is obliged to consider all
practical, technologically feasible options.
See State Farm, 463 U.S. at 48, 103 S.Ct.
at 2869. The Government contends, how-
ever, that the Secretary did in fact consider
this alternative and advanced adequate rea-
sons for rejecting it.
We agree. Although the Final Rule is
scarcely a model of clarity on this specific
point, the Secretary’spath may nonetheless
reasonably be discerned. See Bowman
Transportation, 419 U.S. at 286, 95 S.Ct.
at 442. One of the subsections in the Sec-
retary’s discussion of her reasons for not
adopting other alternatives was entitled
“Airbags and/or Non-Detachable Seat-
belts.” That section discussed the weak-
nesses of non-detachable belts. See 49
Fed.Reg. at 29,002. It seems clear to us
that this discussion was intended to re-
spond both to the argument that detacha-
ble belts should be eliminated as a means
of satisfying the passive restraint require-
ment and to the argument that non-detach-
able belts should be required in tandem
with airbags. First, the perceived individu-
al weaknesses of airbags and non-detacha-
ble belts are, standing alone, obviously ger-
mane to the desirability of requiring the
combination of the two. Second, the Secre-
tary expressly invoked her earlier discus-

28. The dissent contends that the individual
weaknesses of airbags and non-detachable belts
might be alleviated by requiring both. Dissent
at 497. While a dual requirement might max-
489

sion of various alternatives, including an
outright requirement of airbags. There
was obviously no need to repeat all the
points on which she had already elaborated
at considerable length.28 Third, had the
Secretary intended in this section to ad-
dress only the option of requiring airbags
or non-detachable seat belts, one would
think she would have chosen to entitle this
subsection differently than she did.
As to the substance of the decision not to
require both devices, we cannot discern any
significant defects in the Secretary’s rea-
soning. Having concluded that non-detach-
able automatic belts posed public-accepta-
bility concerns sufficient to preclude re-
quiring manufacturers to install them
(rather than detachable belts), the Secre-
tary could reasonably decide not to require
that non-detachable belts be used in tan-
dem with airbags. While not articulated
with crystalline clarity, the Secretary’s dis-
cussion of this issue passes muster under
the “arbitrary and capricious” standard.

IV
For the foregoing reasons, the petition of
the State of New York is denied insofar as
it challenges the Secretary’s decision not to
require airbags or non-detachable seat
belts. All of the other petitions, together
with the remainder of New York’spetition,
are dismissed as unripe.
So Ordered.

MIKVA, Circuit Judge, concurring in
part and dissenting in part:

I agree with my colleagues that most of
the challenges to the Secretary’s authority
are not ripe for the review being sought.
While I am troubled by the seeming ab-
sence of any statutory authority for the
Secretary’s stick and carrot dealings with
the states, the time to confront that ques-
tion frontally is not now and may never be,
as far as most of the petitioners are con-

imize protection, it would obviously do nothing
to relieve the Secretary’s concerns about the
primary drawbacks of the devices, namely cost
and public acceptability.

490

cerned. I am not as sanguine about the
New York challenges to the Secretary’s
actions. My colleagues agree that most of
the New York complaints are timely and
properly before this court. In my view,
however, they have erroneously declared
one claim untimely. Moreover, I believe
that all the complaints are meritorious as
well.
New York attacks the Secretary’s Final
Rule on four grounds. The majority ad-
dresses the merits of only three, upholding
the agency’s action as to each. Based on a
misperception of the thrust of the fourth
claim, the majority rules it not ripe for
review. I find the agency’s action in each
of the four instances is ripe and fails to
withstand judicial scrutiny under the arbi-
trary and capricious standard of review.
Unlike the majority, I believe that the
agency has failed to make the requisite
rational connection between the facts in
evidence and its judgment relating to New
York’s claims sufficient to pass muster un-
der the arbitrary-and-capricious standard.
Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
There is no disagreement about the stan-
dard or the evidentiary dimensions of our
review. The Secretary’s modification of
the safety standards may be set aside if
“found to be ‘arbitrary, capricious, an
abuse of discretion, ”or otherwise not in
accordance with law.’ See Motor Vehicle
Manufacturers Association of the United
States, Inc. v. State Farm Mutual Auto-
mobile Insurance Co., 463 U.S. 29, 41, 103
S.Ct. 2856, 2865, 77 L.Ed.2d 443 (1983) (cit-
ing 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A)). An agency rule
will be deemed arbitrary and capricious if
“the agency has relied on factors which
Congress has not intended it to consider,
entirely failed to consider an important as-
pect of the problem, or offered an explana-
tion for its decision that runs counter to the
evidence before the agency.” Id. at 43,103
S.Ct. at 2867. It is well settled that in
examining the agency’s actions under the
arbitrary-and-capricious standard, we must
confine our “searching and careful” re-
view, see Citizens to Preserve Overton
Park, Inc. v. Volpe, 401 U.S. 402, 416, 91
S.Ct. 814, 824, 28 L.Ed.2d 136 (1971),to the
evidence in the record. The agency record
must reflect an adequate and reasonable
basis for the decision, including considera­
tion of all relevant factors. State Farm,
463 U.S. at 43, 103 S.Ct. at 2866; ILGWU
v. Donovan, 722 F.2d 795, 822 (D.C.Cir.
1983), cert. denied sub nom. Breen v. ILG-­
WU,469 U.S. 820, 105 S.Ct. 93, 83 L.Ed.2d
39 (1984). The reviewing court must judge
the reasons and justifications the agency
presents for its action and not supply a
reasoned basis where the agency itself has
provided none. SEC v. Chenery Corp.,
332 U.S. 194, 196, 67 S.Ct. 1575, 1577, 91
L.Ed. 1995 (1947). “[I]t is the agency’s
responsibility, not this [cjourt’s, to explain
its decision.” State Farm, 463 U.S. at 57,
103 S.Ct. at 2874.

I

A
New York contends that the Secretary
arbitrarily failed to adequately consider the
alternative of permitting both mandatory
usage laws (MULs) and a federal passive
restraint standard. Maj. Op. at 480 n. 9
(citing New York Brief at 25-27). The
majority incorrectly subsumes this claim
into petitioners’ challenge to the automatic
rescission feature of the Secretary’s Rule.
Maj. Op. at 480 & n. 9. In so doing, the
majority concludes that the claim is “not
ripe for review.” Maj. Op. at 480. Were I
to agree that New York’s claim is nothing
more than an attack on the reasonableness
of the “trapdoor” provision, I would concur
in my colleagues’ determination that the
court must decline review of this issue, just
as they have done when the other petition-
ers made this assertion. However, I be-
lieve the challenge is part of New York’s
contention that “the Final Rule is more
lenient (and therefore less promotive of
automobile safety) than is justified by the
record.” See Maj. Op. at 485.

New York is not questioning the safety
effectiveness of MULs per se— an issue
which need not be reached unless and until
the trapdoor opens. Rather, it is challeng-
ing the Secretary’s design of a passive

restraint requirement upon consideration
of only an either/or alternative, without
also examining a combination approach.
New York argues that the evidence in the
record suggests that the combination of
MULs plus passive restraints would pro-
vide greater safety benefits than the MUL-
or-passive restraint option. That the Secre-
tary effectuated her design through the
automatic rescission provision does not
change the import of the claim. Nor, in my
estimation, does it affect the claim’stimeli-
ness. If the argument proves true, “then
many people, including New York citizens,
may be adversely affected in the most di-
rect way by the Secretary’s failure to re-
quire greater protection.” See Maj. Op. at
485. Thus, even under the majority’s rea-
soning, this issue is ripe for review. See
id. Furthermore, upon examination of the
record, I conclude that the agency’s deci-
sion to reject this alternative is devoid of
any meaningful support.

B
During the most recent round of rule-
making, numerous commentators argued
that passive restraints should be viewed in
conjunction with and not as an alternative
to state laws requiring seatbelt use. See
49 Fed.Reg. 28,999 (1984). These com-
ments were given passing address. In the
fifty-page record, the Secretary responded
with a one sentence indirect retort:
This argument ignores public
both the
acceptability concerns set forth above
and the incentive for passage of such
laws— to the extent there is significant
consumer resistance to automatic protec-
tion devices— created by the depart-
ment’s approach.
Id. Examination of this option is nil. In-
stead, the Secretary steadfastly maintained
that either automatic occupant protection
or MULs covering two-thirds of the popula-
tion would meet the “standards of the Act”
and “carry out the objective and purpose of
the statute,” so long as the MULs met the
Department’s criteria. Id. Playing these
alternatives against one another rather
than in tandem led the Secretary to adopt
491

the MUL rescission provision. She based
her action on the Department’s conclusion
that “coverage of a large percentage of the
American people by seatbelt laws that are
enforced would largely negate the incre-
mental increase in safety to be expected
from an automatic protection require-
ment.” Id. at 28,997. There are two prob-
lems with this conclusion.
First, it is completely unsupported, ifnot
contradicted, by the relevant data. No-
where in the record does the Department
explain how it concludedthat the incremen-
tal safety benefits of passive restraints, as
compared to MULs alone, would not be
worth the cost. To the contrary, the De-
partment’s regulatory impact analysis
strongly suggests that passive restraints
could well be cost-beneficial even if states
passed MULs; it concedes that the combi-
nation could maximize both short-term and
long-term safety benefits. See 1984 Final
Regulatory Impast Analysis at VI-29 to
-30 (J.A. 250-52); see also 49 Fed.Reg. at
28,991 (noting the advantages of passive
restraints combined with seatbelt use). It
stands to reason that only a combination of
the two methods would ensure that the
safety benefits are afforded the citizens
and travellers in those states that did not
enact MULs. Thus, contrary to the De-
partment’s conclusion, the evidence indi-
cates that safety would be enhanced by
permitting the two regulatory schemes to
coexist.
Second, the Department’s finding does
not support the automatic rescission of the
passive restraint requirement upon pas-
sage of MULs covering two-thirds of the
states. Indeed, it cannot be supported in
advance of any opportunity to assess the
actual effect of state MULs in operation.
The Department noted, “in order for it to
accept MULs as an alternative to requir-
ing automatic crash protection, MULs must
provide a level of safety equivalent to that
which would be expected to be provided ...
by the automatic system.” 49 Fed.Reg. at
28,999 (emphasis added). The Depart-
ment’s conclusion that MULs can be as
effective as passive restraints standing
alone, although supported by an extraordi-

492

narily thin record, must be respected. But
this again formulates the inquiry only in
terms of an either/or approach. Particu-
larly given the fact that at the time of
reporting only one American state had ever
required seatbelt usage, it seems surpass-
ingly capricious for the Department to de-
cide that MULs covering only two-thirds of
the population would render passive re-
straints superfluous. If MULs actually
prove to be workable and so safety-effec-
tive that passive restraints are unneces-
sary, the Department can always rescind
the passive restraint requirement at some
later date— when there is hard evidence to
prove what is now a most doubtful predic-
tion.
In its second justification for dismissing
a passive restraint-plus-MUL option, the
Department noted tersely that the passive
restraint-or-MUL approach both addresses
the “significant consumer resistance” to
automatic protective devices and offers
states an “incentive” to pass MULs. The
Secretary apparently believed that promul-
gating a passive restraint along with pro-
motion of state MULs would both meet
with intense public resistance to passive
restraints and prevent her from effectively
encouraging MUL enactment. Hence, nei-
ther element of the scheme would be ac-
complished. The Secretary’s reasoning is
far from comprehensible. To the extent it
can be pieced together, itlacks record sup-
port.
In defending her treatment of the two
safety protection methods as alternatives
rather than as complements, the Secretary
emphasized her belief in the importance of
providing some local option in the decision-
making. The “option” open to states is to
express their preference for MULs over
automatic occupant protection by passing
such laws. The Department “believe[d]
that offering this ‘option’should lessen any
public resistance to an automatic occupant
protection requirement. Having some abil-
ity to choose one alternative over the other
should make both alternatives more accept-
able.” Id. at 28,999. The evidence simply
can not bear this strained reasoning.
In the same rulemaking preamble, the
Department concluded that there was no
reason to expect the passive restraint re-
quirement would create significant “public
acceptability concerns” or “consumer re-
sistance.” Id. at 29,002-01. Nor did it
expect any negative reaction to passive re-
straints to seriously impede their efficacy.
Id. at 28,989. Consequently, the Secretary
had no basis for concluding that the MUL-
only alternative was necessary to sweeten
the passive restraint pill, or that state leg-
islatures would be encouraged to pass
MULs by the prospect of avoiding passive
restraints. In fact, it is unclear why the
Department thought the states needed to
be encouraged at all to pass MULs. Ac-
cording to the record, the Department was
impressed by evidence that public support
for highway safety laws was growing
steadily and dramatically. See id. at 28,-
994.
The evidence appears to run counter to
the Secretary’s incentive objective. New
York contends that states would pass more
stringent MULs but for the Secretary’s
trapdoor. Indeed, events since the Rule’s
promulgation indicate that New York is
correct. The states that have passed
MULs have designed weaker, less compre-
hensive statutes so as to avoid compliance
with the Rule’scriteria for consideration in
the two-third's trapdoor figure. Other
states have gone even further and provided
for automatic repeal of their MULs should
the Department count their populations to-
ward the automatic rescission provision.
New York Supp. Brief at 6.
Regardless of the reasonableness of the
incentive device, the either/or scheme ar-
rived at by the Secretary raises a serious
statutory problem. The Secretary’s overt
intent in implementing the provision was to
affect state legislation, specifically state
legislation regulating driver behavior.
That is a regulatory design specifically
withheld from the Secretary by the statute
under which she acted.
It is axiomatic that in implementing leg-
islation the Secretary must perform in ac-
cordance with Congress’purposes in enact-

ing the legislation. See Pacific Legal
Foundation v. Department of Transpor­
tation, 593 F.2d 1338, 1343 (D.C.Cir.),cert.
denied, 444 U.S. 830, 100 S.Ct. 57, 62
L.Ed.2d 38 (1979); SEC v. Chenery Corp.,
332 U.S. 194, 67 S.Ct. 1575, 91 L.Ed. 1995
(1947). Accordingly, in reviewing the De­
partment’s decision we must ensure that
the agency has “remain[ed] within the
bounds of [its] delegated authority.” See
Office of Communication of United
Church of Christ v. FCC, 707 F.2d 1413,
1422-23 (D.C.Cir.1983). Neither the inge­
nuity nor the efficacy of a regulatory
scheme can save itfrom challenge as unau­
thorized action.
Both the language and legislative history
of the National Traffic and Motor Safety
Act of 1966 (the Act), 15 U.S.C. §§ 1381 et
seq. (1982),posit that Congress has autho-
rized the Department to adopt automobile
safety standards which mandate perform-
ance characteristics of equipment and ve-
hicles— exclusively. The Act directs the
Secretary to establish “motor vehicle safe-
ty standards,” id. § 1392(a), defined as “a
minimum standard for motor vehicle per-
formance, or motor vehicle equipment“ per-
formance ...,” id. § 1391(2). ‘Motorve-
hicle safety’ means the performance of mo-
tor vehicles or motor vehicle equip-
ment____” Id. § 1391(1). Behavior of
drivers is not within the permitted scope of
safety standards under the Act. Nor did
the statute contemplate that the Secretary
would delegate any of her automotive safe-
ty standards authority to the states. Nor
did Congress intend such results.
When Congress has sought to permit the
Secretary to influence driver behavior it
has specifically authorized her to structure
state programs. For example, pursuant to
the Highway Safety Act of 1982,23 U.S.C.
§§ 401et seq. (1982),states must submit to
the Secretary for approval driver education
programs designed to reduce traffic acci-
dents and resultant losses. Congress ex-
plicitly provided that “[s]uch programs
shall be in accordance with uniform stan-
dards promulgated by the Secretary.” It
then went on to outline the performance
criteria which she isto employ in designing
493
the standards. Id. § 402(a). Similarly,
Congress itself has set up incentive
schemes when it intended the Secretary to
implement federal safety standards by del-
egating her authority to the states. The
Surface Transportation Assistance Act of
1978, 23 U.S.C. §§ 101et seq. (1982),offers
the best example. There Congress provid-
ed that the Secretary may not approve
federal funds for highway construction and
repairs in any state which has a maximum
speed limit above fifty-five miles per hour.
Id. § 154(a). Congress adopted a more di-
rect incentive in its approach to the drunk
driving problem. It directed the Secretary
to make grants to “states which adopt and
implement effective programs to reduce
traffic safety programs resulting from per-
sons driving while [intoxicated or under the
influence of drugs].” Id. § 408. Congress
then spelled out the minimum statutory
provisions that the state must adopt in
order to be eligible.
When Congress intends to authorize such
action by the Secretary it says so in no
uncertain terms. The authority cannot be
implied. See Calvert Cliffs’Coordinating
Committee, Inc. v. Atomic Energy Com-
mission, 449 F.2d 1109, 1122-27 (D.C.Cir.
1971). There are no parallel provisions in
the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle

Safety Act.
With the Act, Congress meant to shift
the focus of federal automobile safety reg-
ulation away from the prior concern over
the driver’s actions and capacity and to-
ward the “role of the car itself.” S.Rep.
No. 1301, 89th Cong., 2d Sess. 6 (1966),
reprinted in 1966 U.S.Code Cong. & Ad.
News 2710. The Supreme Court, in refer-
ring to the Department’s power to adopt
safety standards under the Act, observed
that “Congress decided that at least part of
the answer [to the problem of highway
deaths and injuries] lies in improving the
design and safety features of the vehicle
itself.” State Farm, 463 U.S. at 33, 103
S.Ct. at 2861. Since safety features would
become effective automatically, regardless
of human action or inaction, it was hoped
that the benefits would be more readily

494

felt. Regulation of driver behavior was
left to the states.
In response to New York’s challenge to
her statutory authority, the Secretary con-
tends that she is permitted to take state
safety laws into account in determining
whether federal standards will be “appro-
priate.” This is unquestionably true, but
misses the mark. While she may consider
the effect of state laws which govern driv-
er behavior, she may not seek to affect
state laws which govern driver behavior.
Mandatory seatbelt use laws regulate be-
havior; they render failure to “buckle-up”
illegal and punishable. The MUL-or-pas-
sive restraint provision not only is intended
to “encourage” states to adopt MULs, 49
Fed.Reg. at 28,998,28,999,but italso seeks
to set the terms of the regulation, to define

the scope of the illegality and severity of
the punishment. See 49 C.F.R. § 571.208.-
S4.1.5.2 (1984)(setting out the four condi-
tions necessary for MUL compliance with
the provision). This “incentive” is provided
to fulfill the safety objectives of the Act.
49 Fed.Reg. at 28,999. Such attempts at
indirect regulation of driver (not to mention
passenger) behavior traverses the bounds
of the Department’s statutory authority.
In sum, the Secretary’s disregard for the
coexistence of MULs and a passive re-
straint requirement is arbitrary and capri-
cious for two reasons. First, the Depart-
ment failed to substantiate its conclusion
that MULs covering only two-thirds of the
population would be more beneficial than
an automatic restraint requirement com-
bined with promotion of MULs; it over-
looked the evidence that the combination

might greatly increase lives saved and inju-
ries prevented, compared to either method
alone, let alone MULs covering only two-
thirds of the population. Second, the Sec-
retary’s “incentive” approach is outside the
agency’smandate under the Act in that its
intent, if not its effect, is to influence driv-
er behavior at the state level and its meth-
odology is through delegation of strictly
federal authority to the states.
II
A
New York urges the court to hold that
the evidence can only reasonably support
the requirement of a nondetachable auto-
matic belt. The majority disparages New
York’s arguments. Based on the Secre-
tary’s stated justifications, it upholds her
decision to allow satisfaction of the passive
restraint requirement through installation
of detachable automatic belts. Maj. Op. at
487. I cannot understand her reasoning
and agree with New York that the evidence
all points the other way.
The Secretary reasoned that non-detacha-
ble belts are the most coercive passive re-
straints, and would therefore cause the
strongest negative public reaction. 49 Fed.
Reg. at 28,993, 29,002. As the majority
correctly states, the Secretary may appro-
priately “weigh [this consideration] in the
balance.” See Maj. Op. at 487. But the
relevant data supports neither the Secre-
tary’s “weighing” process nor her subse-
quent conclusion that detachable belts
should be permitted.
The Secretary indicated that 10 to 20
percent of the public might cut non-detach-
able belts. 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,993. Never-
theless, she concluded that a large propor-
tion of the public would remain protected
by non-detachable belts. See id. at 29,003.
The Secretary does not explain why this
situation is not more protective of safety
than detachable belts in all cars. Indeed,
she cannot rationally explain why without
first finding what percentage of the popu-
lation would detach detachable belts. Ob-
viously, if more than twenty percent of the
public will not use detachable belts, the
safety factor is clearly in favor of the
non-detachable option. The evidence seems
to indicate that more people will detach
detachable belts than will sever non-detach-
able ones. See id. at 28,984. Thus, upon a
fair viewing of the record, the non-detacha-
ble scenario appears to offer greater pro-
tection.
The Secretary offered a second rationale
which the majority also finds convincing.
She judged that non-detachable belts would

require manufacturers to eliminate the cen-
ter front seat, noting that “[t]here is no
commercially developed technology to pro-
vide an automatic belt for the center seat.”
Id. at 28,993. While the manufacturers’
contention was disputed, even if it is fully
accurate it does not provide a complete
rationale for the rejection of a non-detaeha-
ble belt mandate.
Congress charged the Secretary with the
protection of safety. See 15 U.S.C. § 1392;
State Farm, 463 U.S. at 55, 103 S.Ct. at
2873. Although the Act permits the Secre-
tary to consider whether the proposed stan-
dard is “reasonable, practicable and appro-
priate” for the automobile for which it is
prescribed, “[t]he Act intended that safety
standards not depend on current technolo-
gy and could be ‘technology-forcing’in the
sense of inducing the development of supe-
rior safety design.” State Farm, 463 U.S.
at 49, 103 S.Ct. at 2870 (admonishing the
Department for creating more lenient stan-
dards in response to auto manufacturers’
unwillingness to comply with safer de-
vices). New York and the record suggest
that technology already exists to alleviate
the supposed problem. The Act directs the
Secretary to “consider relevant available
motor vehicle safety data” in establishing
her standard. 15 U.S.C. § 1392(f)(1). She
may not sacrifice safety by failing to weigh
all the relevant factors of each viable alter-
native.
The Secretary never balanced the “cen-
ter-seat problem” against the non-detacha-
ble belt’s advantages. She stressed only
their disadvantages. See 49 Fed.Reg. at
28,992-93, 29,002. Furthermore, she over-
looked evidence which mitigates the detrac-
tions of the option. For example, else-
where in the report the Secretary noted
that fewer than one-third of the cars sold in
1982had center front seats and the number
has been steadily declining. The center
seat israrely used and the vast majority of
its occupants are small children who are
covered independently by mandatory auto-
matic child restraint laws in all but two
states. Id. at 28,996. The relative number
of cars and passengers affected by any
inconvenience would appear to be very
495

small, when compared with the increase in
lives saved through increased use of non-
detachable belts. See id. at 28,984.
Having failed to fairly view the relevant
data before her and adequately balance the
evidence in reaching her conclusion, the
Secretary has abdicated her statutory duty
to implement laws which enhance automo-
bile safety. Accordingly, her decision to
not require non-detachable seatbelts is arbi-
trary and capricious.


B
New York also challenges the Secre-
tary’s refusal to mandate installation of
airbags in all automobiles. The majority
upholds the Secretary’s decision, simply
noting that the Secretary concluded that
airbags’ safety would not be worth their
high cost. See Maj. Op. at 488. I believe
that the Secretary’s decision “runs counter
to the evidence before the agency” and
therefore constitutes arbitrary and capri-
cious rulemaking. See State Farm, 463
U.S. at 43, 103 S.Ct. at 2866.
As the Department noted, “[ajirbags of-
fer a distinct advantage over other occu-
pant restraints in that they ensure a usage
rate of nearly 100 percent for both drivers
and passengers.” 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,991.
According to the Department’s research,
under any reasonable scenario airbags save
more lives than any other restraint. In
addition, airbags prevent more moderate
and critical injuries than do seatbelts. See
id. at 28,984-86 & Table 5 (comparing rela-
tive effectiveness of airbags, seatbelts and
automatic restraints). Despite this evi-
dence of the superiority of airbags, the
Secretary ultimately declined to require
them.

The Secretary proffered two rationales
for her decision. First, she cited financial
cost. Id. at 28,990-01. The Department
estimated that installation of airbags in all
three front seat positions of a car would
cost $320 more per car than manual belts.
The majority also notes that the estimated
replacement cost of a deployed airbag is
$800. Maj. Op. at 488. The majority cred-

496

its the Secretary’s conclusion that “[i]n
light of these cost estimates, ... the safety
benefits of airbags would not be worth
their high cost.” Maj. Op. at 488. The
conclusion cannot be reached from the
facts that are used.
The majority reiterates the Secretary’s
conclusionthat the replacement cost of air-
bags “mak[es] itlikely that many airbags
would not be replaced once used.” Maj.
Op. at 488. The presumed result is that
“there would be no protection for the front
seat occupants of [that] automobile.” 49
Fed.Reg. at 29,001. I think the argument
is almost silly. As the Department itself
concedes, few airbags are inadvertently de-
ployed. 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,984. The vast
majority are deployed due to sudden decel-
eration from moderate or high speeds. Of-
ten this deceleration will be caused by or
result in frontal impact. Some of these
cars will be totalled and the cost of install-
ing new airbags is moot. In the Depart-
ment’s own estimation, even when not al-
lowing for wrecked cars, few cars would be
affected by the high cost of replacement.
See id. at 28,984(non-replacement together
with dismantling would leave only 2 per-
cent of all cars without bags at any one
time).
As to those cars that are worth repairing
after a front-end collision in which the air-
bags were deployed, the Department failed
to recognize that it should be considering a
unique sub-group of the population. In
accepting the Secretary’s reasoning, the
majority relies upon the Department’s find-
ing “that ‘onlya small percentage [of the
public]” appears willing to pay more than
$400’ for airbags. Maj. Op. at 488, quot-
ing 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,988. Surely this
opinionpoll might yield different results if
the “public” was comprised of those who
had previously been protected in accidents
by deployed bags. The record does not
indicate how resistant the consumer would
be to paying $800 to replace the devices
that saved the car’s occupants from death
or serious injury. If speculation were in
order, I would venture that such a consum-
er would find $800 a reasonable invest-
ment.
Similarly, the Secretary mistakenly char-
acterized the installation costs of airbags
as being unacceptable to the public. The
Department’s $320 estimate falls well with-
in the range found acceptable in its public
opinion survey. See 49 Fed.Reg. at 28,988
(“a range of approximately $150-$350”).
Admittedly, as the majority points out,
automobile manufacturers’ cost estimates
ai’ehigher, but the record notes much low-
er estimates as well. Id. at 28,990. The
Department specifically concluded that
“[t]he costs of existing automatic restraint
systems [including airbags] are reason-
able____” Id. at 28,996. And yet the Sec-
retary inexplicably finds the cost of airbags
prohibitive.

In sum, the agency has misapplied the
cost-benefit analysis dictated by the Act,
and therefore is not due the deference to
its “expertise” which the majority confers.
As the majority observes, Maj. Op. at 488,
the Supreme Court noted in State Farm
that “[t]he agency is correct to look at the
costs as well as the benefits of Standard
208.” 463 U.S. at 54, 103 S.Ct. at 2872.
But the Court also reminded the Depart-
ment that when considering the reasonable-
ness of the costs, it “should bear in mind
that Congress intended safety to be the
pre-eminent factor under the Act.” 463
U.S. at 55, 103 S.Ct. at 2873 (citing H.R.
Rep. No. 1776, 89th Cong., 2d Sess., 16
(1966)). The Court construed the Act as
mandating an effective safety measure un-
less its incremental costs are more than
minimal. See id. at 54-55, 103 S.Ct. at
2872-73. The Secretary appears to have
eschewed this advice. She focused on
costs, not safety. The $320 incremental
cost for airbags in context appears mini-
mal. The agency’s fears that the public
may resent paying more for airbags do not
reasonably override the agency’s own find-
ings regarding the superior safety-effec-
airbags. S.Rep. 1301,
tiveness of Cf. No.
89th Cong., 2d Sess. 6 (1966),reprinted in
1966 U.S.Code Cong. & Ad.News 2709,
2714 (“safety shall be the overriding con-
sideration in the issuance of standards”).

The Secretary’s second rationale for re-
jecting an airbag requirement is a forecast-
ed lack of public enthusiasm. The Secre-
tary noted, and the majority recounts, pub-
lic fears regarding airbags — fears which
the Department admits “can be adequately
addressed.” 49 Fed.Reg. at 29,001. In her
explanation of the Final Rule, however, the
Secretary fails to note, or apparently give
any weight to, the Department’s finding
that “[ajirbags were rated highest [among
manual belts, automatic belts and airbags]
on comfort, convenience and appearance
and were perceived to be safer than other
restraint systems by infrequent belt
users.” Id. at 28,988. Thus, even on the
public acceptability factor alone, the evi-
dence is at best mixed for and against
airbags.
The agency is entitled to consider antici-
pated adverse public reaction. See Pacific
Legal Foundation, 593 F.2d at 1345.
However, itmay not extract only negative
predictions and posture them as explana-
tions for rejecting highly superior safety
devices. The majority would permit the
Secretary to leave the determination to the
“real-world experience [of] the market-
place.” Maj. Op. at 488. This solution
seems facile. The Act charges the Secre-
tary with meeting the needs of motor ve-
hicle safety. Here, the Secretary has con-
sidered only one side of an argument that
at best bears only tangentially on her deci-
sion and has given it paramount impor-
tance.
The record is overwhelming that airbags
would save more lives and prevent more
injuries than automatic belts or any reason-
able scenario of seatbelt use. The Secre-
tary has inadequately explained her rea-
sons for reaching a finding which is at odds
with this evidence. Neither justification
she advances provides a sufficient basis for
not requiring airbags in all automobiles.
There is no “rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.” See
State Farm, 463 U.S. at 42, 103 S.Ct. at
2866 (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168,83
S.Ct. 239, 246, 9 L.Ed.2d 207 (1962)). Thus,
497

the Secretary’s decision should be vacated
as arbitrary and capricious.

C
Finally, New York claims that the Secre-
tary acted arbitrarily and capriciously in
failing altogether to consider, let alone
adopt, the alternative of requiring both air-
bags and non-detachable automatic belts.
The majority makes a specious argument
that the Secretary did consider this alterna-
tive and then concludes that she acted ap-
propriately in rejecting the option. I find
that the Secretary “entirely failed to con-
sider [this] important aspect of the prob-
lem.” See State Farm, 463 U.S. at 43,103
S.Ct. at 2867.
The majority states that the Secretary’s
discussion of the weaknesses of non-de-
tachable belts was intended to both show
that detachable belts should be a means of
compliance under the Rule and respond to
the argument that non-detachable belts
should be required together with airbags.
The majority then sketches its three rea-
sons for this conclusion. Maj. Op. at 489.
First, the majority opines that individual
weaknesses of airbags and non-detachable
belts are germane to the desirability of
requiring both. This ignores the possibility
that the individual weaknesses might be
alleviated by requiring both, in tandem.
Specifically, research noted in the record
has found that airbags function very well
in non-catastrophic, frontal collisions up to
speeds of 45 miles per hour, but are less
effective in side or angle impacts, rollovers,
and catastrophic frontal crashes. 49 Fed.
Reg. at 28,986. The Department thus con-
cluded, “the most effective system is an
airbag plus a lap and shoulder belt. To
obtain maximum protection in not only
frontal, but also side and roll over acci-
dents, occupants of cars with airbags and
lap belts must use a lap belt to supplement
the airbag.” Id. In these types of colli-
sions seatbelts would fill in for the low
effectiveness of airbags. Even at the 12.5
percentage usage estimated for manual
belts, the Department postulated that
many more lives would be saved by a com-

498

bination of airbags and belts than by any
one alternative means used alone. See id.
at 28,986, Table 5; page 13 supra. The
record, otherwise replete with estimates,
data and analysis, does not once attempt to
analyze the consequences of combining air-
bags with non-detachable belts, where us-
age, according to the record, is at least 80
percent.
The second reason postulated by the ma-
jority is that the Secretary expressly in-
voked her earlier discussion of various al-
ternatives, including requiring airbags for
allcars. The majority erroneously believes
this is responsive to the claim that both
airbags and non-detachable belts should be
required. The possibility that the relevant
data would change when options are con-
sidered together or in groups was never
examined by the Secretary.
Third, the majority claims that the sec-
tion’s title “Airbags and/or Non-Detacha-
ble Seatbelt,” indicates an intent to address
the option of requiring airbags and non-de-
tachable seatbelts. Inferring intent from
two words in the section title not only
seems tenuous at best, but incorrectly as-
sumes that intent is as good as act. If the
Secretary failed to address this option,
even if she intended to, she cannot be said
to have considered the option. The plain
words within the section belie the majori-
ty’s interpretation: “The rationals [sic] pro-
vided in the preceding sections for adopting
the new rule and for not retaining the old
rule or amending it to require airbags in all
cars essentialy [sic] provides [sic]the basis
for the Department’s decision not to amend
the old rule to require either airbags or
nondetachable belts or just nondetachable
belts.” 49 Fed.Reg. at 29,002(referring to
the agency’s decision to give automobile
manufacturers an option rather than man-
date any one method). The broken gram-
mar, spelling and syntax suggest the lack
of consideration that was given to the
whole subject of airbags. There is not a
word about the option of airbags plus non-
detachable automatic belts.
The Final Rule is not merely slightly
unclear on the issue, as the majority would
have us believe. It is silent. Given the
Secretary’s lack of consideration, the ma-
jority’s enigmatic statement as to the rea-
sonableness of her “decision” is extrava-
gant praise for non-performance.

Ill
The subject of how to enhance automo-
bile safety remains the controversial sub-
ject it has always been. Congress has
wrestled with it in numerous contentious
and agonizing battles. No statutory pro-
posal has ever commanded universal enthu-
siasm, and the statutes on the books have
been criticized for what they contain and
for what they lack. It is not for the agen-
cy or the courts to settle these basic policy
disputes. Rather, both branches of
government have an obligation to apply
and enforce the mandates that Congress
has laid down. Because, as New York
contends, the agency failed to do so, and
because my colleagues have given these
agency failures a pass, I dissent.







George SHULTZ, Secretary of State,
et al., Appellants,
v.
CROWLEY,
James D. et al.
No. 84-5667.
United States Court of Appeals,
District of Columbia Circuit.

Argued Sept. 12, 1985.
Decided Sept. 18, 1986.
Rehearing Denied Dec. 12, 1986.