Biden v. Missouri — 595 U.S. 87 (2022) — source: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Dysania22/AI_Project/main/Supreme-Court-Database/data/21A240 Biden v. Missouri.txt (and DissentThomas, DissentAlito)

::decision_cite:: 21A240
::decision_name::  Biden v. Missouri
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: 
::opinion_type:: 
::opinion:: 

															

															NOTICE: This opinion is subject to
formal revision before publication in the preliminary print of the
United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter
of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington,
D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in
order that corrections may be made before the preliminary print
goes to press.

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 21A240 and 21A241

															_________________

															JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A240v.

															MISSOURI, et al.

															

															XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A241v.

															LOUISIANA, et al.

															on applications for stays

															[January 13, 2022]

															

															Per Curiam.

															The Secretary of Health and Human Services
administers the Medicare and Medicaid programs, which provide
health insurance for millions of elderly, disabled, and low-income
Americans. In November 2021, the Secretary announced that, in order
to receive Medicare and Medicaid funding, participating facilities
must ensure that their staff—unless exempt for medical or religious
reasons—are vaccinated against COVID–19. 86 Fed. Reg. 61555 (2021).
Two District Courts enjoined enforcement of the rule, and the
Government now asks us to stay those injunctions. Agreeing that it
is entitled to such relief, we grant the applications.

															I

															A

															The Medicare program provides health insurance
to individuals 65 and older, as well as those with specified
disabilities. The Medicaid program does the same for those with low
incomes. Both Medicare and Medicaid are administered by the
Secretary of Health and Human Services, who has general statutory
authority to promulgate regulations “as may be necessary to the
efficient administration of the functions with which [he] is
charged.” 42 U. S. C. §1302(a).

															One such function—perhaps the most basic, given
the Department’s core mission—is to ensure that the healthcare
providers who care for Medicare and Medicaid patients protect their
patients’ health and safety. Such providers include hospitals,
nursing homes, ambulatory surgical centers, hospices,
rehabilitation facilities, and more. To that end, Congress
authorized the Secretary to promulgate, as a condition of a
facility’s participation in the programs, such “requirements as
[he] finds necessary in the interest of the health and safety of
individuals who are furnished services in the institution.” 42
U. S. C. §1395x(e)(9) (hospitals); see, e.g.,
§§1395x(cc)(2)(J) (outpatient rehabilitation facilities),
1395i–3(d)(4)(B) (skilled nursing facilities), 1395k(a)(2)(F) (i)
(ambulatory surgical centers); see also §§1396r(d)(4)(B),
1396d(l)(1), 1396d(o) (corresponding provisions in
Medicaid Act).

															Relying on these authorities, the Secretary has
established long lists of detailed conditions with which facilities
must comply to be eligible to receive Medicare and Medicaid funds.
See, e.g., 42 CFR pt. 482 (2020) (hospitals); 42 CFR pt. 483
(long-term care facilities); 42 CFR §§416.25–416.54 (ambulatory
surgical centers). Such conditions have long included a requirement
that certain providers maintain and enforce an “infection
prevention and control program designed . . . to help
prevent the development and transmission of communicable diseases
and infections.” §483.80 (long-term care facilities); see,
e.g., §§482.42(a) (hospitals), 416.51(b) (ambulatory
surgical centers), 485.725 (facilities that provide outpatient
physical therapy and speech-language pathology services).

															B

															On November 5, 2021, the Secretary issued an
interim final rule amending the existing conditions of
participation in Medicare and Medicaid to add a new
requirement—that facilities ensure that their covered staff are
vaccinated against COVID–19. 86 Fed. Reg. 61561, 61616–61627. The
rule requires providers to offer medical and religious exemptions,
and does not cover staff who telework full-time. Id., at
61571–61572. A facility’s failure to comply may lead to monetary
penalties, denial of payment for new admissions, and ultimately
termination of participation in the programs. Id., at
61574.

															The Secretary issued the rule after finding that
vaccination of healthcare workers against COVID–19 was “necessary
for the health and safety of individuals to whom care and services
are furnished.” Id., at 61561. In many facilities, 35% or
more of staff remain unvaccinated, id., at 61559, and those
staff, the Secretary explained, pose a serious threat to the health
and safety of patients. That determination was based on data
showing that the COVID–19 virus can spread rapidly among healthcare
workers and from them to patients, and that such spread is more
likely when healthcare workers are unvaccinated. Id., at
61558–61561, 61567–61568, 61585–61586. He also explained that,
because Medicare and Medicaid patients are often elderly, disabled,
or otherwise in poor health, transmission of COVID–19 to such
patients is particularly dangerous. Id., at 61566, 61609. In
addition to the threat posed by in- facility transmission itself,
the Secretary also found that “fear of exposure” to the virus “from
unvaccinated health care staff can lead patients to themselves
forgo seeking medically necessary care,” creating a further “ris[k]
to patient health and safety.” Id., at 61588. He further
noted that staffing shortages caused by COVID–19-related exposures
or illness has disrupted patient care. Id., at 61559.

															The Secretary issued the rule as an interim
final rule, rather than through the typical notice-and-comment
procedures, after finding “good cause” that it should be made
effective immediately. Id., at 61583–61586; see 5
U. S. C. §553(b)(B). That good cause was, in short, the
Secretary’s belief that any “further delay” would endanger patient
health and safety given the spread of the Delta variant and the
upcoming winter season. 86 Fed. Reg. 61583–61586.

															C

															Shortly after the interim rule’s announcement,
two groups of States—one led by Louisiana and one by Missouri—filed
separate actions challenging the rule. The U. S. District
Courts for the Western District of Louisiana and the Eastern
District of Missouri each found the rule defective and entered
preliminary injunctions against its enforcement. Louisiana
v. Becerra, 2021 WL 5609846 (Nov. 30, 2021); Missouri
v. Biden, 2021 WL 5564501 (Nov. 29, 2021). In each case, the
Government moved for a stay of the injunction from the relevant
Court of Appeals. In Louisiana, the Fifth Circuit denied the
Government’s motion. 20 F. 4th 260 (2021). In Missouri,
the Eighth Circuit did so as well. See Order in No. 21–3725 (Dec.
13, 2021). The Government filed applications asking us to stay both
District Courts’ preliminary injunctions, and we heard expedited
argument on its requests.

															II

															A

															First, we agree with the Government that the
Secretary’s rule falls within the authorities that Congress has
conferred upon him.

															Congress has authorized the Secretary to impose
conditions on the receipt of Medicaid and Medicare funds that “the
Secretary finds necessary in the interest of the health and safety
of individuals who are furnished services.” 42 U. S. C.
§1395x(e)(9).[1] COVID–19 is a
highly contagious, dangerous, and—especially for Medicare and
Medicaid patients—deadly disease. The Secretary of Health and Human
Services determined that a COVID–19 vaccine mandate will
substantially reduce the likelihood that healthcare workers will
contract the virus and transmit it to their patients. 86 Fed. Reg.
61557–61558. He accordingly concluded that a vaccine mandate is
“necessary to promote and protect patient health and safety” in the
face of the ongoing pandemic. Id., at 61613.

															The rule thus fits neatly within the language of
the statute. After all, ensuring that providers take steps to avoid
transmitting a dangerous virus to their patients is consistent with
the fundamental principle of the medical profession: first, do no
harm. It would be the “very opposite of efficient and effective
administration for a facility that is supposed to make people well
to make them sick with COVID–19.” Florida v. Department
of Health and Human Servs., 19 F. 4th 1271, 1288 (CA11
2021).

															The States and Justice Thomas offer a narrower
view of the various authorities at issue, contending that the
seemingly broad language cited above authorizes the Secretary to
impose no more than a list of bureaucratic rules regarding the
technical administration of Medicare and Medicaid. But the
longstanding practice of Health and Human Services in implementing
the relevant statutory authorities tells a different story. As
noted above, healthcare facilities that wish to participate in
Medicare and Medicaid have always been obligated to satisfy a host
of conditions that address the safe and effective provision of
healthcare, not simply sound accounting. Such requirements govern
in detail, for instance, the amount of time after admission or
surgery within which a hospital patient must be examined and by
whom, 42 CFR §482.22(c)(5), the procurement, transportation, and
transplantation of human kidneys, livers, hearts, lungs, and
pancreases, §482.45, the tasks that may be delegated by a physician
to a physician assistant or nurse practitioner, §483.30(e), and,
most pertinent here, the programs that hospitals must implement to
govern the “surveillance, prevention, and control of
. . . infectious diseases,” §482.42.

															Moreover, the Secretary routinely imposes
conditions of participation that relate to the qualifications and
duties of healthcare workers themselves. See, e.g.,
§§482.42(c) (2)(iv) (requiring training of “hospital personnel and
staff ” on “infection prevention and control guidelines”),
483.60(a)(1)(ii) (qualified dieticians must have completed at least
900 hours of supervised practice), 482.26(b)–(c) (specifying
personnel authorized to use radiologic equipment). And the
Secretary has always justified these sorts of requirements by
citing his authorities to protect patient health and safety. See,
e.g., §§482.1(a)(1)(ii), 483.1(a)(1)(ii), 416.1(a)(1). As
these examples illustrate, the Secretary’s role in administering
Medicare and Medicaid goes far beyond that of a mere
bookkeeper.

															Indeed, respondents do not contest the validity
of this longstanding litany of health-related participation
conditions. When asked at oral argument whether the Secretary
could, using the very same statutory authorities at issue here,
require hospital employees to wear gloves, sterilize instruments,
wash their hands in a certain way and at certain intervals, and the
like, Missouri answered yes: “[T]he Secretary certainly has
authority to implement all kinds of infection control measures at
these facilities.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 57–58. Of course the vaccine
mandate goes further than what the Secretary has done in the past
to implement infection control. But he has never had to address an
infection problem of this scale and scope before. In any event,
there can be no doubt that addressing infection problems in
Medicare and Medicaid facilities is what he does.

															And his response is not a surprising one.
Vaccination requirements are a common feature of the provision of
healthcare in America: Healthcare workers around the country are
ordinarily required to be vaccinated for diseases such as hepatitis
B, influenza, and measles, mumps, and rubella. CDC, State
Healthcare Worker and Patient Vaccination Laws (Feb. 28, 2018),
https://www.cdc.gov/ phlp/publications/topic/vaccinationlaws.html.
As the Secretary explained, these pre-existing state requirements
are a major reason the agency has not previously adopted vaccine
mandates as a condition of participation. 86 Fed. Reg.
61567–61568.

															All this is perhaps why healthcare workers and
public-health organizations overwhelmingly support the Secretary’s
rule. See id., at 61565–61566; see also Brief for American
Medical Assn. et al. as Amici Curiae; Brief for
American Public Health Assn. et al. as Amici Curiae;
Brief for Secretaries of Health and Human Services et al. as
Amici Curiae. Indeed, their support suggests that a
vaccination requirement under these circumstances is a
straightforward and predictable example of the “health and safety”
regulations that Congress has authorized the Secretary to
impose.

															We accordingly conclude that the Secretary did
not exceed his statutory authority in requiring that, in order to
remain eligible for Medicare and Medicaid dollars, the facilities
covered by the interim rule must ensure that their employees be
vaccinated against COVID–19.

															B

															We also disagree with respondents’ remaining
contentions in support of the injunctions entered below. First, the
interim rule is not arbitrary and capricious. Given the rulemaking
record, it cannot be maintained that the Secretary failed to
“examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory
explanation for” his decisions to (1) impose the vaccine mandate
instead of a testing mandate; (2) require vaccination of employees
with “natural immunity” from prior COVID–19 illness; and (3) depart
from the agency’s prior approach of merely encouraging vaccination.
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United States, Inc. v.
State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 463 U.S.
29, 43 (1983); see 86 Fed. Reg. 61583, 61559–61561, 61614. Nor
is it the case that the Secretary “entirely failed to consider”
that the rule might cause staffing shortages, including in rural
areas. State Farm, 463 U. S., at 43; see 86 Fed. Reg.
61566, 61569, 61607–61609. As to the additional flaws the District
Courts found in the Secretary’s analysis, particularly concerning
the nature of the data relied upon, the role of courts in reviewing
arbitrary and capricious challenges is to “simply ensur[e] that the
agency has acted within a zone of reasonableness.” FCC v.
Prometheus Radio Project, 592 U. S. ___, ___ (2021)
(slip op., at 12).

															Other statutory objections to the rule fare no
better. First, Justice Alito takes issue with the Secretary’s
finding of good cause to delay notice and comment. But the
Secretary’s finding that accelerated promulgation of the rule in
advance of the winter flu season would significantly reduce
COVID–19 infections, hospitalizations, and deaths, 86 Fed. Reg.
61584–61586, constitutes the “something specific,” post, at
3 (dissenting opinion), required to forgo notice and comment. And
we cannot say that in this instance the two months the agency took
to prepare a 73-page rule constitutes “delay” inconsistent with the
Secretary’s finding of good cause. Second, we agree with the
Secretary that he was not required to “consult with appropriate
State agencies,” 42 U. S. C. §1395z, in advance of
issuing the interim rule. Consistent with the existence of the good
cause exception, which was properly invoked here, consultation
during the deferred notice-and-comment period is permissible. We
similarly concur with the Secretary that he need not prepare a
regulatory impact analysis discussing a rule’s effect on small
rural hospitals when he acts through an interim final rule; that
requirement applies only where the Secretary proceeds on the basis
of a “notice of proposed rulemaking,” §1302(b)(1), followed by a
“final version of [the] rule,” §1302(b)(2). Lastly, the rule does
not run afoul of the directive in §1395 that federal officials may
not “exercise any supervision or control over the . . .
manner in which medical services are provided, or over the
selection [or] tenure . . . of any officer or employee
of ” any facility. That reading of section 1395 would mean
that nearly every condition of participation the Secretary has long
insisted upon is unlawful.

															*  *  *

															The challenges posed by a global pandemic do
not allow a federal agency to exercise power that Congress has not
conferred upon it. At the same time, such unprecedented
circumstances provide no grounds for limiting the exercise of
authorities the agency has long been recognized to have. Because
the latter principle governs in these cases, the applications for a
stay presented to Justice Alito and Justice Kavanaugh and by them
referred to the Court are granted.

															The District Court for the Eastern District of
Missouri’s November 29, 2021, order granting a preliminary
injunction is stayed pending disposition of the Government’s appeal
in the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit and
the disposition of the Government’s petition for a writ of
certiorari, if such writ is timely sought. Should the petition for
a writ of certiorari be denied, this order shall terminate
automatically. In the event the petition for a writ of certiorari
is granted, the order shall terminate upon the sending down of the
judgment of this Court.

															The District Court for the Western District of
Louisiana’s November 30, 2021, order granting a preliminary
injunction is stayed pending disposition of the Government’s appeal
in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and the
disposition of the Government’s petition for a writ of certiorari,
if such writ is timely sought. Should the petition for a writ of
certiorari be denied, this order shall terminate automatically. In
the event the petition for a writ of certiorari is granted, the
order shall terminate upon the sending down of the judgment of this
Court.

															

															It is so ordered.

Notes
1
While this provision pertains
only to hospitals, the Secretary has similar statutory powers with
respect to most other categories of healthcare facilities covered
by the interim rule. See supra, at 2. Justice Thomas
points out that for five such kinds of facilities, the relevant
statute does not contain express “health and safety” language.
Post, at 3 (dissenting opinion). But employees at these
facilities—which include end-stage renal disease clinics and home
infusion therapy suppliers—represent less than 3% of the workers
covered by the rule. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 25. And even with respect
to them, the pertinent statutory language may be read as
incorporating the “health and safety” authorities applicable to the
other 97%. See, e.g., 42 U. S. C. §1396d(d)(1). We
see no reason to let the infusion-clinic tail wag the hospital dog,
especially because the rule has an express severability provision.
86 Fed. Reg. 61560.




==========

::decision_cite:: 21A240
::decision_name::  Biden v. Missouri
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: Thomas
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 21A240 and 21A241

															_________________

															JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A240v.

															MISSOURI, et al.

															

															XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES, et al., APPLICANTS

															21A241v.

															LOUISIANA, et al.

															on applications for stays

															[January 13, 2022]

															Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Alito,
Justice Gorsuch, and Justice Barrett join, dissenting.

															Two months ago, the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), acting through the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS), issued an omnibus rule mandating that
medical facilities nationwide order their employees, volunteers,
contractors, and other workers to receive a COVID–19 vaccine.
Covered employers must fire noncompliant workers or risk fines and
termination of their Medicare and Medicaid provider agreements. As
a result, the Government has effectively mandated vaccination for
10 million healthcare workers.

															Two District Courts preliminarily enjoined
enforcement of the omnibus rule, and the Government now requests an
emergency stay of those injunctions pending appeal. Because the
Government has not made a strong showing that it has statutory
authority to issue the rule, I too would deny a stay.

															To obtain a stay, the Government must show that
there is (1) a reasonable probability that we would grant
certiorari; (2) a fair prospect that we would reverse the judgments
below; and (3) a likelihood that irreparable harm will result from
denying a stay. Hollingsworth v. Perry, 558 U.S.
183, 190 (2010) (per curiam). Because there is no real
dispute that this case merits our review, our decision turns
primarily on whether the Government can make a “strong showing”
that it is likely to succeed on the merits. Nken v.
Holder, 556 U.S.
418, 426 (2009). In my view, the Government has not made such a
showing here.

															The Government begins by invoking two statutory
provisions that generally grant CMS authority to promulgate rules
to implement Medicare and Medicaid. The first authorizes CMS to
“publish such rules and regulations . . . as may be
necessary to the efficient administration of the [agency’s]
functions.” 42 U. S. C. §1302(a). The second authorizes
CMS to “prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out
the administration of the insurance programs” under the Medicare
Act. §1395hh(a)(1).

															The Government has not established that either
provision empowers it to impose a vaccine mandate. Rules carrying
out the “administration” of Medicare and Medicaid are those that
serve “the practical management and direction” of those programs.
Black’s Law Dictionary 58 (3d ed. 1933). Such rules are “necessary”
to “administration” if they bear “an actual and discernible nexus”
to the programs’ practical management. Merck & Co.,
Inc. v. United States Dept. of Health and Human
Servs., 962 F.3d 531, 537–538 (CADC 2020) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Here, the omnibus rule compels millions of
healthcare workers to undergo an unwanted medical procedure that
“cannot be removed at the end of the shift,” In re MCP No.
165, 20 F. 4th 264, 268 (CA6 2021) (Sutton, C. J.,
dissenting from denial of initial hearing en banc). To the extent
the rule has any connection to the management of Medicare and
Medicaid, it is at most a “tangential” one. Merck & Co.,
Inc., 962 F. 3d, at 538.

															At oral argument, the Government largely
conceded that §1302(a) and §1395hh(a)(1) alone do not authorize the
omnibus rule. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 7, 10. Instead, it fell back on
a constellation of statutory provisions that each concern one of
the 15 types of medical facilities that the rule covers. See 86
Fed. Reg. 61567 (2021). Several of those provisions contain
language indicating that CMS may regulate those facilities in the
interest of “health and safety.” In the Government’s view, that
language authorizes CMS to adopt any “requirements that [CMS] deems
necessary to ensure patient health and safety,” including a vaccine
mandate applicable to all facility types. Application in No.
21A240, p. 19. The majority, too, treats these scattered provisions
as a singular (and unqualified) delegation to the Secretary to
adopt health and safety regulations.

															The Government has not made a strong showing
that this agglomeration of statutes authorizes any such rule. To
start, 5 of the 15 facility-specific statutes do not authorize CMS
to impose “health and safety” regulations at all. See 42
U. S. C. §§1396d(d)(1), (h)(1)(B)(i), 1395rr(b)(1)(A),
1395x(iii)(3)(D)(i)(IV), 1395i–4(e). These provisions cannot
support an argument based on statutory text they lack. Perhaps that
is why the Government only weakly defends them as a basis for its
authority. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 25–28.

															Next, the Government identifies eight
definitional provisions describing, for example, what makes a
hospital a “hospital.” These define covered facilities as those
that comply with a variety of conditions, including “such other
requirements as the Secretary finds necessary in the interest of
. . . health and safety.” §1395x(e)(9); see also
§§1395x(dd)(2)(G), (o)(6), (ff )(3)(B)(iv), (cc)(2)(J),
(p)(4)(A)(v), (aa)(2)(K), 1395k(a)(2)(F)(i). The Government
similarly invokes a saving clause for “health and safety”
regulations applicable to “all-inclusive care” programs for the
elderly, see §§1395eee(f )(4), 1396u–4(f )(4), and a
requirement that long-term nursing facilities “establish and
maintain an infection control program designed to provide a safe,
sanitary, and comfortable environment . . . to help
prevent the development and transmission of disease,”
§1395i–3(d)(3).

															The Government has not made a strong showing
that this hodgepodge of provisions authorizes a nationwide vaccine
mandate. We presume that Congress does not hide “fundamental
details of a regulatory scheme in vague or ancillary provisions.”
Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc.,
531 U.S.
457, 468 (2001). Yet here, the Government proposes to find
virtually unlimited vaccination power, over millions of healthcare
workers, in definitional provisions, a saving clause, and a
provision regarding long-term care facilities’ sanitation
procedures. The Government has not explained why Congress would
have used these ancillary provisions to house what can only be
characterized as a “fundamental detail” of the statutory scheme.
Had Congress wanted to grant CMS power to impose a vaccine mandate
across all facility types, it would have done what it has done
elsewhere—specifically authorize one. See 22 U. S. C.
§2504(e) (authorizing mandate for “such immunization
. . . as necessary and appropriate” for Peace Corps
volunteers).

															Nonetheless, even if I were to accept that
Congress could have hidden vaccine-mandate power in statutory
definitions, the language in these “health and safety” provisions
does not suggest that Congress did so. Take, for example, 42
U. S. C. §1395x(e), which defines “hospital” for certain
purposes. Three subsections define hospitals as providers of
specific patient services, see §§1395x(e)(1), (4), (5), and five
describe administrative requirements that a facility must meet to
qualify as a covered hospital, see §§1395x(e)(2)–(3), (6)–(8). The
final subsection then provides that a “hospital” must also “mee[t]
such other requirements as the Secretary finds
necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals
who are furnished services.” §1395x(e)(9) (emphasis added).

															Contrary to the Government’s position, this kind
of catchall provision does not authorize every regulation related
to “health and safety.” As with all statutory language, context
must inform the scope of the provision. See AT&T Corp.
v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 525 U.S.
366, 408 (1999) (Thomas, J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part) (citing Neal v. Clark, 95 U.S.
704, 708 (1878)). “[W]here, as here, a more general term
follows more specific terms in a list, the general term is usually
understood to embrace only objects similar in nature to those
objects enumerated by the preceding specific words.” Epic
Systems Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U. S. ___, ___ (2018)
(slip op., at 12) (internal quotation marks omitted). That
presumption is particularly forceful where the statutory catchall
refers to “such other” requirements, signaling that the subjects
that come before delimit any residual authority. See ibid.
Here, in §1395x(e), none of the myriad subsections preceding the
“health and safety” subsection suggests that the Government can
order hospitals to require virtually all hospital personnel to be
vaccinated. Rather, these subsections show that HHS’ residual
authority embraces only administrative requirements like those that
precede it—including “provid[ing] 24-hour nursing service,”
“maintain[ing] clinical records on all patients,” or having “bylaws
in effect.” §§1395x(e)(2), (3), (5). A requirement that all
healthcare workers be vaccinated is plainly different in kind. The
same reasoning applies to almost all of the Government’s proposed
facility-specific statutes. See §§1395x(aa)(2), (dd)(2),
(o)(6); see also §§1395x(ff )(3)(B), (p)(4)(A),
(cc)(2), 1395eee, 1396u–4(f )(4).

															Only one facility-specific provision is arguably
different. It regulates long-term care facilities and mandates an
“infection control program” among its “health and safety”
provisions. §1395i–3(d)(3). But that infection-control provision
focuses on sanitizing the facilities’ “environment,” not its
personnel. Ibid. In any event, even if this statutory
language justified a vaccine mandate in long-term care facilities,
it could not sustain the omnibus rule. Neither the “infection
control” language nor a reasonable analog appears in any of the
other facility-specific provisions. Basic interpretive principles
would thus suggest that CMS lacks vaccine-mandating authority with
respect to the other types of facilities. See Russello v.
United States, 464 U.S.
16, 23 (1983). And, of course, the omnibus rule cannot rest on
the long-term care provision alone. By CMS’ own estimate, long-term
care facilities employ only 10% of the 10 million healthcare
workers that the rule covers. 86 Fed. Reg. 61603. Put simply, the
oblique reference to “infection control” in the definitional
provision for long-term care facilities cannot authorize an omnibus
vaccine mandate covering every type of facility that falls
within CMS’ purview.

															For its part, the Court does not rely on the
Government’s proffered statutory provisions. Instead, it asserts
that CMS possesses broad vaccine-mandating authority by pointing to
a handful of CMS regulations. To begin, the Court does not explain
why the bare existence of these regulations is evidence of what
Congress empowered the agency to do. Relying on them appears to put
the cart before the horse.

															Regardless, these regulations provide scant
support for the sweeping power the Government now claims. For
example, CMS regulations that mandate the number of hours a
dietician must practice under supervision, ante, at 6
(citing 42 CFR §483.60 (2020)), or that prescribe “the tasks that
may be delegated . . . to a physician assistant or nurse
practitioner,” ante, at 6 (citing §483.30(e)), cannot
support a vaccine mandate for healthcare personnel.

															The Court also invokes a regulation requiring
hospitals to implement programs that “govern the ‘surveillance,
prevention, and control of . . . infectious
diseases,’ ” ante, at 6 (quoting §482.42), as well as a
few regulations that require “infection and prevention control
programs” at some (but apparently not all) facility types. See
ante, at 3 (citing, inter alia, §482.42). But many of
these infection-control regulations, like the infection-control
program set out at 42 U. S. C. §1395i–3(d)(3), are far
afield from immunization. See, e.g., 42 CFR §§485.725(b)–(e)
(specifying requirements for “aseptic techniques,” “housekeeping
services,” “[l]inens,” and “[p]est control”). And insofar as they
do touch on immunization, they require only that facilities
offer their residents the opportunity to obtain a
vaccine, along with “the opportunity to refuse” it. §483.80(d)(1).
These regulations are not precedents for CMS’ newfound authority
mandating that all employees be vaccinated.

															Finally, our precedents confirm that the
Government has failed to make a strong showing on the merits. “We
expect Congress to speak clearly when authorizing an agency to
exercise powers of vast economic and political significance.”
Alabama Assn. of Realtors v. Department of Health and
Human Servs., 594 U. S. ___, ___ (2021)
(per curiam) (slip op., at 6) (internal quotation marks
omitted). And we expect Congress to use “exceedingly clear language
if it wishes to significantly alter the balance between state and
federal power.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
The omnibus rule is undoubtedly significant—it requires millions of
healthcare workers to choose between losing their livelihoods and
acquiescing to a vaccine they have rejected for months. Vaccine
mandates also fall squarely within a State’s police power, see
Zucht v. King, 260 U.S.
174, 176 (1922), and, until now, only rarely have been a tool
of the Federal Government. If Congress had wanted to grant CMS
authority to impose a nationwide vaccine mandate, and consequently
alter the state-federal balance, it would have said so clearly. It
did not.

															*  *  *

															These cases are not about the efficacy or
importance of COVID–19 vaccines. They are only about whether CMS
has the statutory authority to force healthcare workers, by
coercing their employers, to undergo a medical procedure they do
not want and cannot undo. Because the Government has not made a
strong showing that Congress gave CMS that broad authority, I would
deny the stays pending appeal. I respectfully dissent.

													


==========

::decision_cite:: 21A240
::decision_name::  Biden v. Missouri
::decision_year:: 2022
::opinion_author:: Alito
::opinion_type:: Dissent
::opinion:: 

															

															SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

															_________________

															Nos. 21A240 and 21A241A

															_________________

															JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
et al., APPLICANTS

															21A240v.

															MISSOURI, et al.

															XAVIER BECERRA, SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
et al., APPLICANTS

															21A241v.

															LOUISIANA, et al.

															on applications for stays

															[January 13, 2022]

															Justice Alito, with whom Justice Thomas, Justice Gorsuch, and
Justice Barrett join, dissenting.

															I join Justice Thomas’s dissent because I do not think that the
Federal Government is likely to be able to show that Congress has
authorized the unprecedented step of compelling over 10,000,000
healthcare workers to be vaccinated on pain of being fired. The
support for the argument that the Federal Government possesses such
authority is so obscure that the main argument now pressed by the
Government—that the authority is conferred by a hodgepodge of
scattered provisions—was not prominently set out by the Government
until its reply brief in this Court. Before concluding that the
Federal Government possesses this authority, we should demand
stronger statutory proof than has been mustered to date.

															But even if the Federal Government has the authority to require
the vaccination of healthcare workers, it did not have the
authority to impose that requirement in the way it did. Under our
Constitution, the authority to make laws that impose obligations on
the American people is conferred on Congress, whose Members are
elected by the people. Elected representatives solicit the views of
their constituents, listen to their complaints and requests, and
make a great effort to accommodate their concerns. Today, however,
most federal law is not made by Congress. It comes in the form of
rules issued by unelected administrators. In order to give
individuals and entities who may be seriously impacted by agency
rules at least some opportunity to make their views heard and to
have them given serious consideration, Congress has clearly
required that agencies comply with basic procedural safeguards.
Except in rare cases, an agency must provide public notice of
proposed rules, 5 U. S. C. §553(b); the public must be
given the opportunity to comment on those proposals, §553(c); and
if the agency issues the rule, it must address concerns raised
during the notice-and-comment process. United States v.
Nova Scotia Food Products Corp., 568 F.2d 240, 252 (CA2
1977); see also Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of United States,
Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 463 U.S.
29, 43 (1983). The rule may then be challenged in court, and
the court may declare the rule unlawful if these procedures have
not been followed.

															In these cases, the relevant agency did none of those things,
and the Court rewards this extraordinary departure from ordinary
principles of administrative procedure. Although today’s ruling
means only that the Federal Government is likely to be able to show
that this departure is lawful, not that it actually is so, this
ruling has an importance that extends beyond the confines of these
cases. It may have a lasting effect on Executive Branch
behavior.

															Because of the importance of notice-and-comment rulemaking, an
agency must show “good cause” if it wishes to skip that process. 5
U. S. C. §553(b)(3)(B). Although this Court has never
precisely defined what an agency must do to demonstrate good cause,
federal courts have consistently held that exceptions to
notice-and-comment must be “ ‘narrowly construed and only
reluctantly countenanced.’ ” Mack Trucks, Inc. v.
EPA, 682 F.3d 87, 93 (CADC 2012) (quoting Utility Solid
Waste Activities Group v. EPA, 
236 F.3d 749, 754 (CADC 2001)); see also C. Koch & R.
Murphy, Good Cause for Avoiding Procedures, 1 Admin. L. & Prac.
§4:13 (3d ed. 2021).

															The agency that issued the mandate at issue here, i.e.,
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), admits it did
not comply with the commonsense measure of seeking public input
before placing binding rules on millions of people, but it claims
that “[t]he data showing the vital importance of vaccination”
indicate that it “cannot delay taking this action.” 86 Fed. Reg.
61555, 61583 (2021). But CMS’s generalized justification cannot
alone establish good cause to dispense with Congress’s clear
procedural safeguards. An agency seeking to show good cause must
“point to something specific that illustrates a particular harm
that will be caused by the delay required for notice and comment.”
United States v. Brewer, 766 F.3d 884, 890 (CA8 2014)
(internal quotation marks omitted).

															Although CMS argues that an emergency justifies swift action,
both District Courts below held that CMS fatally undercut that
justification with its own repeated delays. The vaccines that CMS
now claims are vital had been widely available 10 months before
CMS’s mandate, and millions of healthcare workers had already been
vaccinated before the agency took action. President Biden announced
the CMS mandate on September 9, 2021, nearly two months before the
agency released the rule on November 5, and the mandate itself
delayed the compliance deadline further by another month until
December 6. 86 Fed. Reg. 61555; id., at 61573 (making
implementation of the vaccine mandate begin “30 days after
publication” and completed “60 days after publication”). This is
hardly swift.

															CMS argues that its delay, “even if true,” does not provide a
“reason to block a rule” that it claims will protect patient
health. Application in No. 21A241, p. 36. It claims that its
departure from ordinary procedure after extraordinary delay should
be excused because nobody can show they were prejudiced by the lack
of a comment period before the rule took effect. But it is CMS’s
affirmative burden to show it has good cause, not respondents’
burden to prove the negative. Northern Arapahoe Tribe v.
Hodel, 808 F.2d 741, 751 (CA10 1987). Congress placed
procedural safeguards on executive rulemaking so agencies would
consider “important aspect[s] of the problem[s]” they seek to
address before restricting the liberty of the people they regulate.
State Farm, 463 U. S., at 43. Because CMS chose to
circumvent notice-and-comment, States that run Medicaid facilities,
as well as other regulated parties, had no opportunity to present
evidence refuting or contradicting CMS’s justifications before the
rule bound them. And because CMS acknowledged its own “uncertainty”
and the “rapidly changing nature of the current pandemic,” 86 Fed.
Reg. 61589, it should have been more receptive to feedback,
not less. “[A]n utter failure to comply with notice and comment
cannot be considered harmless if there is any uncertainty at all as
to the effect of that failure.” Sugar Cane Growers Cooperative
of Florida v. Veneman, 
289 F.3d 89, 96 (CADC 2002).

															Today’s decision will ripple through administrative agencies’
future decisionmaking. The Executive Branch already touches nearly
every aspect of Americans’ lives. In concluding that CMS had good
cause to avoid notice-and-comment rulemaking, the Court shifts the
presumption against compliance with procedural strictures from the
unelected agency to the people they regulate. Neither CMS nor the
Court articulates a limiting principle for why, after an
unexplained and unjustified delay, an agency can regulate first and
listen later, and then put more than 10 million healthcare workers
to the choice of their jobs or an irreversible medical
treatment.

															Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

													
